--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY ON OR AFTER THE 26th OF DECEMBER 
SUNDAY AFTER THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY RIGHTEOUS ONES:  
JOSEPH THE BETROTHED, DAVID THE KING, AND JAMES THE BROTHER OF 
THE LORD  
N.B. Be it known that if this Sunday, i.e., that following the Nativity, falleth on 
either the 26th, 27th, 28th, 29th, or 30th day of December, then at Little Vespers we 
chant the Stichera to the Resurrection and to the Theotokos, as usual.  
AT GREAT VESPERS  
After the usual psalm, we chant the first Kathisma in its entirety.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the Resurrection.  
Then 4 Stichera of the Feast, in Tone II: 
Come, let us rejoice in the Lord, telling of this present mystery: The middle wall of 
partition hath been demolished, the fiery sword is removed, the cherub doth 
withdraw from the gate of life, and I partake of the food of paradise, from whence I 
was driven away because of disobedience; for the immutable Image of the Father, the 
Image of His eternity, doth assume the guise of a servant, issuing forth from the 
Mother who knew not wedlock, without undergoing change, yet He remained what 
He was before - our true God; and He hath received what He was not, becoming a 
man in His love for mankind. To Him let us cry aloud: O God Who wast born of the 
Virgin, have mercy on us! 
The composition of Anatolius: When the Lord Jesus was born from the holy 
Virgin, all things were enlightened; for when the shepherds piped, the magi offered 
homage and the angels sang, Herod was troubled, for God, the Savior of our souls, 
appeared in the flesh. 
Thy kingdom, O Christ God, is a kingdom of all the ages, and thy dominion is for 
all generations. O Christ God Who wast incarnate by the Holy Spirit and became a 
man through the Ever-virgin Mary, Thou hast shone forth Thine advent upon us as 
light. O Light from Light, Effulgence of the Father, Thou hast illumined all creation. 
Every creature that hath breath praiseth Thee, the Image of the glory of the Father. O 
Thou Who art and ever shall be, O God Who hast shone forth from the Virgin: Have 
mercy upon us! 
What shall we offer Thee, O Christ, in that Thou hast appeared on earth as a man 
for our sake? For every creature fashioned by Thee offereth Thee thanksgiving: the 
angels, hymnody; the heavens, a star; the magi, gifts; the shepherds, their wonder; the 
earth, a cave; the wilderness, a manger; and we, the Virgin Mother. O God Who hast 
existed from before time, have mercy upon us! 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
And 3 Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Let us all praise King David, * the ancestor of God, * for from him sprang forth 
the rod of the Virgin, * and from her blossomed the Flower, even Christ, * Who hath 
called forth Adam and Eve from corruption, ** in that He is full of tender 
compassion.  
In old age Joseph the betrothed * beheld things foretold by the prophets clearly 
being fulfilled, * having received a strange betrothal * and a revelation from angels * 
who cry aloud, Glory be to God, ** Who hath sent down peace upon the earth!  
Let us all praise the brother of God, * for he is a holy hierarch * who also nobly 
shone forth in martyrdom, * through whose prayers do Thou save all who sing to 
Thee, O Jesus, our God, ** Who wast wrapped in swaddling-bands in the cave.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Let us celebrate the memory of the pious David - king and prophet, and James - 
apostle and first bishop; and, delivered from deception by their teachings, let us 
glorify Christ, Who shone forth from the Virgin and became incarnate to save our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day.  
At the Litiya, the Stichera chanted on the Feast, in Tone I: 
Heaven and earth are glad today, as the prophets said, and angels and mortals keep 
spiritual festival, for God hath appeared in the flesh, born of the Virgin, to those who 
sit in darkness and shadow: the cave and the manger have received Him; the 
shepherds proclaim the wonder; the magi from the East bring gifts to Bethlehem; and 
with our unworthy lips we offer Him the praise of the angels: Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace! For the expectation of the nations hath come, and 
coming hath saved us from slavery to the enemy.  
Heaven and earth have now joined together today since Christ hath been born. 
Today God hath come to earth and man hath ascended to the heavens. Today He 
Who is invisible by nature is seen in the flesh for mankind's sake. Wherefore, 
exclaiming in glorification, let us cry out to Him: Glory to God in the highest, and on 
earth peace: for Thou hast given us Thine advent! O our Savior, glory be to Thee!  
“Glory to God in the highest!” is heard from the incorporeal ones in Bethlehem 
today, addressed to Him Who was well pleased to become Peace on earth. Now the 
Virgin hath become more spacious than the heavens, for Light hath shone forth upon 
the darkened and lifted up the lowly who chant with the angels: Glory to God in the 
highest!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Beholding that which He had created according to His image and likeness 
corrupted by disobedience, Jesus descended, bowing down the heavens, and made 
His abode in the Virgin's womb without undergoing change, that in her He might 
restore Adam Who had become corrupt, yet crieth: Glory to Thine appearance, O my 
Redeemer and God!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., this Sticheron, by John the Monk, in Tone V:  
The magi, kings of Persia, manifestly recognizing the King of heaven Who was 
born on earth, arrived in Bethlehem, led by the radiant star, bearing choice gifts of 
gold, frankincense and myrrh; and falling down, they offered worship, for they beheld 
the Timeless One lying in the cave as a babe.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Thy birth giving hath become the memorial of priests, the dominion and gladness 
of kings, O Lover of mankind, and, rejoicing therein, we say, Our Father, Who art in 
the heavens, hallowed be Thy name!  
Both now ..., in the same tone:  
Today the invisible Nature hath been joined to us through the Virgin. Today the 
infinite Essence is wrapped in swaddling clothes in Bethlehem. Today by a star doth 
God lead the Magi to worship, foretelling His three-day burial, as it were, in their gifts 
of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. To Him let us sing: O Christ God, Who didst 
become incarnate from the Virgin, save Thou our souls!  
After the Blessing of the Loaves, the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV: 
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Twice)  
And that of the righteous ones, in Tone II:  
O Joseph, proclaim the glad tidings to David, * the ancestor of God, * for thou 
hast seen a Virgin give birth; * with the shepherds didst thou give glory; * with the 
Magi didst thou worship; * by an angel wast thou instructed. ** Entreat Christ God, 
that He save our souls! (Once) 
Where the all-night vigil is not served: at Compline, after the Trisagion, the 
Kontakion of the ancestors of God; Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the 
feast. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Resurrection, (Twice):  
Glory ..., that of the righteous ones, in Tone II:  
O Joseph, proclaim the glad tidings to David, * the ancestor of God, * for thou 
hast seen a Virgin give birth; * with the shepherds didst thou give glory; * with the 
Magi didst thou worship; * by an angel wast thou instructed. ** Entreat Christ God, 
that He save our souls!  
Both now ..., that of the feast, in Tone IV: 
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee.  
After the readings from the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns & Theotokia of the 
Resurrection. The Evlogitaria, The Hypacoi, The Song of Ascents, and 
Prokeimenon of the tone. The Resurrection Gospel, then “Having beheld the 
Resurrection of Christ...” After Psalm 50, the Stichera of the Resurrection.  
The canons:  
That of the Resurrection, with 4 Troparia, including its Irmos; that of the 
Theotokos, with 2 Troparia; that of the Feast, with 4 Troparia; and the 
following canon, of the righteous ones, with 4 Troparia, the composition of 
Cosmas the Monk, of Maiuma, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Canon I, the acrostic whereof is: “Having become man, Christ remaineth God as He 
was before”, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
That which, though fashioned in the image of God, became wholly corrupt 
through transgression, having fallen away from the divine life, hath the wise Creator 
restored, for He hath been glorified.  
The Creator, seeing mankind, whom He had fashioned with His own hands, 
perishing, descended, bowing down the heavens, and becoming truly incarnate, taking 
upon Himself all the essence of man, through the pure and divine Virgin, for He hath 
been glorified.  
Christ God, being the wisdom, Word, Power, Effulgence and Son of the Father, 
having made Himself unknowable to the powers of heaven, and even more so to 
those on earth, hath become a man and restored us, for He hath been glorified.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Canon II, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy people out of 
the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * the chariots and the 
might of Pharaoh. 
As many as celebrate the Advent festivities of Him who became incarnate for our 
sake, let us hymn with joy James, the brother of God, and David, the forefather of 
God.  
The choirs of angels stood before Joseph in Bethlehem, saying: Glory to God in 
the highest! With them let us hymn Him Whose good pleasure it was to become 
incarnate.  
O David, thou forefather of God, calling the righteous James, with harps hymn 
thou the Lord, Who is incarnate from the root of Jesse.  
Theotokion: To Thee shall I sing, O Lord my God, for Thou wast born of the holy 
Virgin Mother and hast shown her to be the hope of our souls.  
Katavasia: “Christ is born ...” 
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
Adam, fashioned of dust, partook of a higher inspiration, yet he was led to stumble 
into corruption through a woman's deceit, seeing Christ born from a woman, he cried 
aloud: O Thou Who for my sake hast become like me, holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Lord Christ, mingling with clay, Thou didst conform Thyself thereto, imparting 
Thy divine essence to vile flesh by participating therein, becoming earthly, yet 
remaining God, and lifting up our horn: holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Bethlehem, thou king of the princes of Judah, be glad! For Christ Who doth 
shepherd Israel, seated on the shoulders of the cherubim, hath manifestly come forth 
from thee, and, having lifted up our horn, hath established His reign over all.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ God, Thou art confirmation of them that hope in Thee, * 
make us steadfast in Thine Orthodox Faith, * for Thou lovest mankind.  
With the angels let us all hymn Christ God, Who, without seed, hath been born in 
the flesh from the Virgin, crying aloud: Glory to God in the highest!  
O ye faithful, with David and James let us honor with hymns, as is meet, the most 
jubilant feast of Him Who emptied Himself for our sake.  
Like a bridegroom from a bridal chamber the Lord shall came forth from His 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Mother's womb! Thus said David, whom, with James, let us now hymn.  
 Theotokion: Let us honor Mary, the unwedded Theotokos, for the Sun of 
righteousness hath shone forth upon us for her sake.  
Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
Ikos: Bethlehem hath opened Eden! We have found Joy in a secret place: come, 
and let us receive the things of paradise within the cave. There the unwatered Root 
hath blossomed, bearing forgiveness as its fruit. There an unfailing Wellspring hath 
been found, from whence David of old longed to drink. There the Virgin hath given 
birth to the Babe, straightway quenching the thirst of Adam and David. Wherefore, 
let us hasten to this place where now is born a young Child, the pre-eternal God!  
Sessional Hymn of the righteous ones, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Right fittingly let us hymn the righteous Joseph, the betrothed of the Virgin, with 
James and David; for, having trod the righteous path, they have attained unto the 
mansions of heaven, and joining chorus With the angels as is meet, they beg 
remission of sins for us.  
Glory ..., in the same melody: 
 The Virgin hath given birth to the Creator of all things, and the Magi come to 
worship Him in the flesh. Mankind and angels render glory; the cave and the manger 
offer gifts, praising Him Who hath been newly born as a babe, the pre-eternal God!  
Both now ..., in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “The choir of angels ...”: 
 The choir of prophets divinely celebrates the wonder which took place within 
thee, O Virgin; for thou didst give birth to God incarnate upon earth. Wherefore, 
angels and shepherds chant, and the Magi and Joseph sing of the wonders to David, 
the forefather of God.  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
O Christ Thou art He Whom Jacob foretold of old, as the expectation of the 

--- PAGE 7 ---
nations, and Who hath shone forth from the tribe of Judah, and come to overthrow 
the power of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria, transforming falsehood into 
godly faith. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Shining forth, a Star out of Jacob, O Master, Thou hast filled with joy the wise 
observers of the stars, the followers of the words of Balaam, the soothsayer of old; 
manifestly receiving the first-fruits of the nations who have entered in to worship 
Thee. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Like drops of rain falling upon the earth, and like the gentle rain upon the fleece, 
O Christ, Thou hast descended upon the womb of the Virgin. Ethiopia and Tharsis, 
the islands of Arabia and Saba, and they who rule all the land of the Medes, have 
fallen down before Thee, O Savior. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Proclaiming the advent of Thine appearance on earth, O Christ God, * 
the prophet cried aloud with gladness: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
With the Magi let us worship Him Who hath been born; and with the angels and 
Joseph let us join chorus, crying aloud in a godly manner: Glory to Christ God in the 
highest!  
Christ, Who reigneth over all kings and Who hath been born in the flesh of the 
seed of David, hath accepted James, His chosen brother, as it was His good pleasure 
so to do.  
The Lord God, Who appeared in the flesh through the Virgin, hath glorified your 
memorials together, O James, chosen of the apostles, and David all-blessed, ye holy 
ones.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O unwedded Theotokos, thou who surpassing the ranks of 
the cherubim, hast given birth in the flesh unto God Who is borne upon thine arm.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Submitting to be recorded among Thy servants at the command of Caesar, Thou 
hast freed us slaves from the enemy and sin, O Christ; and having abased Thyself for 
us, Thou hast rendered our nature divine through Thy union and sharing therein.  
Behold, the Virgin hath conceived in her womb, as was foretold of old, and hath 
given birth to God made man, yet remaineth a virgin. O ye sinners who for her sake 
have been reconciled with God, faithfully hymn her as the true Theotokos.  
Canon II  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Irmos: O Thou Who hast caused the light to shine, * who hast made bright the 
dawn and revealed the day; * glory be to Thee, glory be to Thee, * O Jesus 
Thou Son of God. 
Glory be to Thee! Glory be to Thee, O God incarnate, Whose good pleasure it was 
to take flesh from the pure Virgin! thus did Joseph cry aloud.  
Glory be to Thee! Glory be to Thee, O Jesus, Son of God, Who wast born from 
the Virgin, rendering the memory of David and James illustrious!  
Jesus, the Son of God, Whom the prophet David, by divine inspiration, called the 
gentle Rain upon the fleece, hath James preached.  
Theotokion: Unable to keep silent, creation doth offer thee the angel's salutation, 
O Virgin: Rejoice, O pure Mother of Jesus, the Son of God!  
ODE VI 
Canon I 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Christ our God, Whom the Father begat before the morning star, hath come forth 
incarnate, from a womb. He Who ruleth over the most pure powers lieth in a manger 
of dumb beasts and is wrapped in swaddling-bands, loosing the knotted bonds of 
transgressions.  
A young Child, a Son, is born of the clay of Adam and given to the faithful: He is 
the Father and Prince of the age to come, and is called the Angel of great Counsel. 
He is the mighty God Who exerciseth dominion over all creation.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * Prophet Jonah praying in the belly 
of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O Jesus Thou 
King of hosts. 
Awe-struck, the heavenly hosts stood before the cave and, unable to keep silent, 
hymned Thy most pure nativity, chanting: Glory in the highest to the newborn God!  
Upon Thy throne hast Thou sat, as Thou didst swear unto the prophet David, O 
Master, Who came forth from the fruit of his loins; and unto James didst Thou 
commit the throne of the Church, O Christ.  
David the king hath been shown to be a wondrous prophet and forefather of the 
incarnation of God; and James, the disciple of Jesus, hath been shown forth as the 
first bishop.  
Theotokion: We beseech thee, O Virgin Theotokos: On behalf of thy servants 

--- PAGE 9 ---
entreat Him Who was incarnate from thee, for we know thee to be our only 
intercessor.  
Kontakion of the righteous ones, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”: 
Today the divine David is filled with gladness, * and Joseph doth offer praise with 
James. * They rejoice, receiving a crown through their kinship with Christ; * and they 
praise Him Who hath ineffably been born on earth, ** and cry aloud: O 
Compassionate One, save those who honor Thee!  
Ikos: The Incorporeal One is, through the ineffable Counsel, born in the flesh; He 
that is uncontainable is now contained in a body and doth preserve both essences 
immutably; He that is without beginning and Who alone is beyond time doth take on 
a beginning; an Infant of surpassing perfection is beheld; He that beareth all things is 
borne in arms. Wherefore, as God, He doth crown through His birth those who are 
honored by their kinship with Him, and, glorifying them with faith, we cry out 
unceasingly: O Compassionate One, save those who honor Thee!  
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
 The piping shepherds received an awesome vision of light; for the glory of the 
Lord shone round about them, and an angel cried aloud: Sing ye, for Christ, the 
blessed God of your fathers, is born!  
Suddenly, at the voice of the angel, the armies of heaven cried out: “Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will among men! Christ hath shone forth: the 
blessed God of your fathers!”  
“What words are these?” said the shepherds; “Let us go and see what hath become 
of the blessed Christ!” And hastening to Bethlehem, they bowed down in worship 
with the Theotokos, chanting: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Canon II  
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the flame 
of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, blessed art 
Thou. 
Amazed beyond words by the birthgiving of Mary, the Theotokos, the angelic 
choirs cried out to Joseph: Glory in the highest, and on earth peace!  
David, the leader of the bride, and James, who was the chamberlain of the divine 
Church, did say: O God, Who hath become incarnate for our sake, blessed art Thou!  
O thou that wast a king among prophets and a prophet among kings, chant thou 

--- PAGE 10 ---
with the divinely wise James and lift thy voice in song for us: O Christ, Who wast 
incarnate for our sake, blessed art Thou!  
Theotokion: Prefigured in the unconsumed bush and in the bedewed furnace, O 
most pure Mother, thou didst bear without seed God incarnate, O ever-blessed one.  
ODE VIII 
Canon I 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The daughter of Babylon carried off the captive children of David from Sion to 
herself; but now she hath sent her own children, the magi bearing gifts, to the God-
pleasing daughter of David, who prayeth. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
 The harps refused to play their sad songs, for the children of Sion would not sing 
in a strange land; but Christ, shining forth in Bethlehem, hath destroyed all the 
delusion of Babylon and her musical instruments. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: 
Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Babylon received the plunder of the kingdom of Sion and its captive riches; but 
Christ hath drawn its treasures to His Sion, guiding the star-observing kings by a star. 
Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: Those who confessed Christ the King, * the Children prisoners, in the 
furnace * cried with a loud voice, saying: * O all ye works of the Lord, praise 
ye the Lord. 
Christ incarnate, Whom the hosts of heaven have glorified, doth Joseph the be-
trothed unceasingly hymn, chanting: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Christ incarnate, Whom David the forefather of God foretold, James preached to 
the people, crying aloud: All ye works of the Lord, hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!  
Christ, Who was born of the Virgin and Who hath exalted the sacred memory of 
David and James, in that they are His friends, hymn, all ye works of the Lord, and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
 
Theotokion: Christ the King, to Whom Mary the Theotokos hath given birth for our 

--- PAGE 11 ---
sake, remaining a pure Virgin even after birthgiving, hymn, all ye works of the Lord, 
and supremely exalt throughout all ages!  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
The magi beheld the excellent course of the strange star which had newly 
appeared, illumining the heavens and marking the birth of Christ the King in 
Bethlehem, for our salvation.  
The star revealed the newborn infant King to the magi who said: “Where is He, 
for we have come to worship Him?” But Herod who fought against God, enraged, 
was troubled, seeking to slay the Christ.  
Herod inquired concerning the time of the star, following whose course the magi 
worshipped Christ with gifts in Bethlehem; but, guided thereby to their homeland, 
they left the cruel murderer of the infants behind in mockery.  
Canon II  
Irmos: On the mountain Moses beheld the unconsumed bush; * and in the 
cave Joseph heard the ineffable birth. * O Theotokos, and undefiled Virgin, * 
thou Mother who knewest not a man: * thee do we magnify!  
With trembling doth all creation minister unto Him Who hath been born from the 
Virgin: the heavens with a star; the earth with a manger; the mountain with a cave; the 
Magi with gifts; the shepherds with wonder; and the angels with the hymn, Glory to 
God in the highest!  
Of old David was chosen king from amongst the shepherds; and thou, O James 
art from the royal tribe of Judah, shown to be a shepherd of the flock of the 
Incarnate One, the Lamb and Son of God Most High.  
Be glad now, O Bethlehem, having become the city of the new David! O Zion, 
thou citadel of the Churches, exult now, taking up the common celebration of the 
King of all and His favored ones.  
Theotokion: The assemblies of angels glorify thee, O Birthgiver of God, and the 
human race doth unceasingly honor thee with hymns, for by thy divine birthgiving 
hast thou united the earthly to the heavenly. Wherefore, we honor thee.  
Exapostilarion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., that of the righteous ones: 
Spec. Mel.: “With the disciples ...”:  
Let us hymn David, the forefather of God, and divine Joseph, the betrothed of the 
Theotokos, with James, the glorious brother of God, for, with the angels, the Magi 
and the shepherds, they ministered in a godly manner at the divine nativity of Christ 
in the city of Bethlehem, chanting a hymn unto Him as God and Master.  
Both now ..., that of the feast:  

--- PAGE 12 ---
From on high our Savior, the Dayspring of the East hath visited us and we who 
are in shadowy darkness have truly found Him; for the Lord hath been born from the 
Virgin. (Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the Resurrection, and 4 of the feast: 
In Tone IV: 
Be glad, O ye righteous! Rejoice, O heavens! Leap up, ye mountains for Christ 
hath been born! The Virgin sitteth, holding the incarnate Word of God in her bosom, 
like unto the cherubim. Shepherds marvel at Him Who hath been born; the magi 
offer gifts to the Master; and the angels say, chanting: O unapproachable Lord, glory 
be to Thee!  
O Virgin Theotokos having given birth to the Savior, thou hast abolished the 
ancient curse of Eve; for thou didst become the Mother of Him in Whom the Father 
is well pleased bearing the incarnate Word of God in thy bosom. This mystery is not 
subject to testing but with faith alone we all glorify it, crying out with thee and saying: 
O ineffable Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Verse: From the womb before the morning-star have I begotten Thee. * The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent.  
Come let us hymn the Mother of the Savior, who even after giving birth wast 
revealed to be a Virgin. Rejoice O animate city of God the King, wherein Christ 
making His abode, hath wrought salvation! We chant with Gabriel and offer up glory 
with the magi saying: O Theotokos, entreat Him Who became incarnate from thee, 
that we be saved!  
Verse: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, * until I make 
Thine enemies the footstool of Thy feet.  
The Father was well pleased; the Word became flesh; the Virgin gave birth to God 
incarnate; the star proclaimeth Him; the magi offer Him worship; the shepherds 
marvel, and creation rejoiceth.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Blood and fire and clouds of smoke are the wonders which Joel foresaw on earth. 
The blood is the Incarnation; the fire is the Godhead; the clouds of smoke are the 
Holy Spirit, Who descended upon the Virgin, rendering the world fragrant. Great is 
the mystery of Thine Incarnation! O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Now and even., “Most blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos ...”  
Great Doxology. Troparion of the Resurrection. Dismissal. Evangelical Sticheron. 
First Hour, and final dismissal.  
At the Hours, the Troparion of the Resurrection; Glory ..., that of the 
feast/saints; Both now ..., Theotokion. After the “Our Father ...,” the 
Kontakion of the feast, alternating it with that of the saints.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 12 Troparia: 4 from the Octoechos, 4 from the canon of the 
feast (which varies depending on the day on which the Sunday falls), and 4 
from ODE VI of the canon of the righteous ones:  
Awe-struck, the heavenly hosts stood before the cave and, unable to keep silent, 
hymned Thy most pure nativity, chanting: Glory in the highest to the newborn God!  
Upon Thy throne hast Thou sat, as Thou didst swear unto the prophet David, O 
Master, Who came forth from the fruit of his loins; and unto James didst Thou 
commit the throne of the Church, O Christ.  
David the king hath been shown to be a wondrous prophet and forefather of the 
incarnation of God; and James, the disciple of Jesus, hath been shown forth as the 
first bishop.  
Theotokion: We beseech thee, O Virgin Theotokos: On behalf of thy servants 
entreat Him Who was incarnate from thee, for we know thee to be our only 
intercessor.  
After the Entrance, the Troparia of the Resurrection. 
Troparion of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee.  
And that of the righteous ones, in Tone II:  
O Joseph, proclaim the glad tidings to David, * the ancestor of God, * for thou 
hast seen a Virgin give birth; * with the shepherds didst thou give glory; * with the 
Magi didst thou worship; * by an angel wast thou instructed. ** Entreat Christ God, 
that He save our souls!  
 
Glory ..., the Kontakion of the righteous ones, in Tone III:  
Today the divine David is filled with gladness, * and Joseph doth offer praise with 
James. * They rejoice, receiving a crown through their kinship with Christ; * and they 
praise Him Who hath ineffably been born on earth, ** and cry aloud: O 
Compassionate One, save those who honor Thee!  
Both now ..., that of the feast, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Prokeimenon of the tone, and that of the righteous ones, in Tone IV: 
Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In congregations bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of Israel.  
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (1:11-19) 
Brethren, I certify you, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. 
For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus 
Christ. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews' religion, how 
that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: and profited in 
the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly 
zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me 
from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I 
might preach him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and 
blood: neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I 
went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Then after three years I went 
up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. But other of the 
apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother.  
Alleluia, in the Tone of the week, with its Verse. Then: 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember, O Lord, David in all His meekness.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (2:13-23) 
The magi having departed, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, 
saying, Arise, and take up the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be 
thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy 
him. When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed 
into Egypt: and was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son. 
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding 
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the 
coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had 
diligently inquired of the wise men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by 
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, In Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation, and 
weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be 
comforted, because they are not. But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the 
Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the young child 
and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the 
young child's life. And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came 
into the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the 

--- PAGE 15 ---
room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned 
of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee: and he came and dwelt 
in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, 
He shall be called a Nazarene.  
 
In place of “Meet it is” we chant the following  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
Katavasia I: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
 
Communion Verse I: Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise Him in the 
highest.  
Communion Verse II: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
 
 
