--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 26th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER  
SYNAXIS OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY HIEROMARTYR EUTHYMIUS, BISHOP OF 
SARDIS  
AT VESPERS  
We do not chant any Kathisma, unless this feast falleth on Sunday. 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera of the feast, in Tone II:  
Come, let us rejoice in the Lord, telling of this present mystery: The middle wall of 
partition hath been demolished, the fiery sword is removed, the cherub doth 
withdraw from the gate of life, and I partake of the food of paradise, from whence I 
was driven away because of disobedience; for the immutable Image of the Father, the 
Image of His eternity, doth assume the guise of a servant, issuing forth from the 
Mother who knew not wedlock, without undergoing change, yet He remained what 
He was before - our true God; and He hath received what He was not, becoming a 
man in His love for mankind. To Him let us cry aloud: O God Who wast born of the 
Virgin, have mercy on us! (Twice) 
The composition of Anatolius: When the Lord Jesus was born from the holy 
Virgin, all things were enlightened; for when the shepherds piped, the magi offered 
homage and the angels sang, Herod was troubled, for God, the Savior of our souls, 
appeared in the flesh. (Twice) 
Thy kingdom, O Christ God, is a kingdom of all the ages, and thy dominion is for 
all generations. O Christ God Who wast incarnate by the Holy Spirit and became a 
man through the Ever-virgin Mary, Thou hast shone forth Thine advent upon us as 
light. O Light from Light, Effulgence of the Father, Thou hast illumined all creation. 
Every creature that hath breath praiseth Thee, the Image of the glory of the Father. O 
Thou Who art and ever shall be, O God Who hast shone forth from the Virgin: Have 
mercy upon us! 
What shall we offer Thee, O Christ, in that Thou hast appeared on earth as a man 
for our sake? For every creature fashioned by Thee offereth Thee thanksgiving: the 
angels, hymnody; the heavens, a star; the magi, gifts; the shepherds, their wonder; the 
earth, a cave; the wilderness, a manger; and we, the Virgin Mother. O God Who hast 
existed from before time, have mercy upon us! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace! Today Bethlehem receiveth Him 
Who is ever seated with the Father. Today the angels glorify as God the Babe Who 
was born. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will among men!  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Entrance, and Great Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: What God is as great as our 
God? * Thou art God Who worketh wonders.  
Verse 1: Thou hast made Thy power known among the peoples; with Thine 
arm hast Thou redeemed Thy people.  
Verse 2: And I said: Now have I made a beginning; this change hath been 
wrought by the right hand of the Most High.  
Verse 3: I remembered the works of the Lord; for I will remember Thy 
wonders from the beginning.  
Note: If it be Saturday evening, we chant the usual Prokeimenon, in Tone VI 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty.  
Verse 1: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself.  
Verse 2: For He established the world which shall not be shaken.  
Verse 3: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  
The Great Prokeimenon “What God is as great as our God ...” and its Stichoi are 
thus chanted on the eve of the feast. Then followeth the litany.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, the composition of John, in Tone VIII: 
A most glorious mystery is wrought today: nature is restored and God becometh a 
man! He hath remained what He hath been, and what He hath not been, He hath 
taken upon Himself, without undergoing either commingling or division.  
Verse: From the womb before the morning star have I begotten Thee. * The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent.  
Arriving in Bethlehem, O Lord, Thou didst make Thine abode in the cave; Thou 
Who hast heaven for Thy throne wast laid in a manger; Thou Whom the armies of 
the angels surround descended unto shepherds, that Thou mayest save our race, in 
that Thou art compassionate. Glory be to Thee!  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: * Sit Thou at My right hand.  
How can I recount this great mystery? He Who is incorporeal hath become 
incarnate, the Word became flesh; the Invisible became visible; the Intangible is 
touched; the Beginningless One beginneth to be. The Son of God becometh the Son 
of man: Jesus Christ, yesterday, today, and for evermore!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
The shepherds hastened to Bethlehem, proclaiming the true Shepherd Who sitteth 
on the cherubim and lieth in the manger, having taken on the guise of a babe for our 
sake. O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. * O Lord, glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT COMPLINE  
On some other day, the canon of the hieromartyr Euthymius is chanted, the acrostic 
whereof is: “Christ Who hath been born crowneth thee with swaddling bands, O 
father”, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
Wrapped in the wounds of stripes, thou didst piously worship the everlasting Lord 
Who was born and wrapped in swaddling bands.  
The Lord Who was laid in a manger received as a Nativity gift the drops of thy 
blood and the sores of thy wounds, as better than gold, frankincense and myrrh, O 
father.  
The Lord Who hath been born and received gold from the magi, O holy hierarch, 
receiveth from thee thine ardent love for Him, and the constancy and might of thy 
true patience.  
Emulating the death of the Master by thine own death, O all-honored one 
manifest in sanctity, thou didst utter the words of the Master, praying radiantly for 
those who slew thee.  
Theotokion: Today the Creator of all is born from thee for us, O blessed one, and 
He Who hath wrapped the sea in mist is wrapped in swaddling bands, O Ever-virgin 
Mother.  
ODE III  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
As a hierarch, instead of frankincense, gold and myrrh, thou didst offer the 
wounds of martyrdom to Christ Who was born in Bethlehem.  
Thou didst emulate Stephen, the protomartyr of Christ, O Euthymius, praying for 
the salvation of those who slew thee.  
With constancy of mind and valor of soul thou didst denounce the impious Leo 
who was raging against the Savior.  
Thou didst carefully keep the commandment of the Savior, O venerable 
Euthymius, laying down thy life for thy friends.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a field holding the uncontainable Creator, containing Him 
in the flesh, O divinely joyous and all-immaculate one.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Smitten upon thy face, thou wast enlightened by divine grace and the wisdom of 
discourse, O all-blessed one, becoming a companion of Christ Who was buffeted in 
the flesh for our sake. 
The honors of thy priesthood were not shamed, nor were thy grey hairs disgraced, 
when the mindless ones, who did not honor thine old age, wounded thee without 
pity.  
As a priceless gift thou didst offer thy precious blood to the Redeemer, Who was 
wrapped in swaddling bands and laid in a manger, O father Euthymius, for it was 
shed for Him.  
Theotokion: He Who created the immaterial essences is born today as a man, 
taking flesh from thee, O Mother of God. To Him do we chant: glory to Christ God 
in the highest!  
ODE V  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
To Thee, O Savior, is brought the animate image who honored the image of Thy 
precious body and the depiction of Thy body.  
To Thee, O Master, is brought a pastor, the namesake of courage, who beareth on 
his own body the wounds of Thy body.  
With the outpouring of thine unjustly shed blood thou didst quench the fire of the 
rage of the iniquitous, O most sacred and all-blessed Euthymius.  
Theotokion: The onslaught of corruption hath ceased, for the Virgin hath given 
birth incorruptibly to Him Who hath freed corrupted human nature from corruption.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Emulating the nakedness of the Savior of all by thy nakedness, and enduring 
wounds and pain, O father, thou didst shed thy blood with His blood.  
Made rich in the virtues, O all-blessed Euthymius, thou didst offer to Him Who 
was born from the Virgin gifts of love, hope and a divinely wise faith which abideth 
forever.  
Having served. Christ lawfully, O divinely eloquent father, upon reaching thine 
end in blood thou didst receive divine and sanctifying discourse as a reward from 
Him.  
Theotokion: He Who fashioned man according to His image hath restored him in 
His great loving-kindness, having perfectly clad Himself in him through thee, O 
Virgin Mother of God.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sessional Hymn of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, O Savior ...”: 
Having suffered most patiently, O holy hierarch, wise Euthymius, as the magi 
offered gifts so didst thou offer thy blood to Christ, Who was born from the Virgin. 
Wherefore, thou hast received a twofold crown of victory, and standest before the all-
holy Trinity, praying that we be saved.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Having mingled the most sacred and divinely given anointing of the priesthood 
with thy blood, thou didst show thyself to be yet more sanctified, crying: Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord my God!  
Having set thy feet upon the rock of faith, O all-blessed one, thou didst remain 
unmoved by all the assaults of temptations, crying out: Blessed art Thou in the temple 
of Thy glory, O Lord my God!  
Thou didst draw down upon thee the grace of the divine protomartyr, whose most 
excellent emulator thou didst show thyself to be, bestowing blessings as rewards upon 
those who pitilessly slew thee, O all-blessed Euthymius.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O sanctified and divine habitation of the Most High! For 
through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been given to those who cry: Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Lady! 
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Contending mightily, O father Euthymius, thou didst stand before the tribunal; for 
thou hadst learned the most perfect boundary of love, in that thou didst consent to 
die for thy friends, who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Splendid in speech and mind, thou didst acquire a splendid soul and a radiant 
countenance; and now thou hast become yet more splendid, O Euthymius, opposing 
the God-hating emperors even to the shedding of thy blood, and crying aloud: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The mighty of the land, committing most iniquitous deeds, fell upon thee, O 
blessed one, to slay thee; but, stretching forth thy hands to the Redeemer Who was 
born from the pure Virgin, thou didst cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Theotokion: Behold, now a ruler and prince hath manifestly failed from the tribe 
of Judah, for thou, O all-immaculate one, hast given birth to Christ, the expectation 
of the nations, for Whom things were stored up of old. To Him do we chant: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
From things here thou hast passed over to the most calm haven, O father; for like 
a sparrow thou hast been delivered from the snare of those who hunted thee, O most 
courageous hieromartyr, blessing Him Who delivered thee.  
Shining supra-naturally, thou didst depart unto the Master, the Light Who 
appeared from the heights of the East, illumined with the radiance of the star which 
hath now shone forth from Judah.  
Thou hast now been deemed worthy to join chorus in the broad expanse of 
paradise, where the radiance of the blessed and the joy of the saints are, O 
Euthymius, for they have received thee as a victorious spiritual athlete.  
Possessing boldness before God as a holy hierarch and martyr, O all-blessed one, 
amid this present winter ask thou peace for the Church and remission of offenses for 
those who hymn thee.  
Theotokion: O most pure Birthgiver of God, thou hast caused the Rod to spring 
forth from the root of Jesse, giving birth for us today to Christ, the Flower of the 
Godhead, the uncontainable God Who hath now been swaddled as a babe.  
Stichera of the holy hieromartyr, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Still dripping with blood, * swathed in its warmth * and emitting the vapor thereof, 
* thou didst stand before Christ, O divinely eloquent father Euthymius, * stretching 
forth now the sores of thy wounds * instead of supplications; * and thou didst pray 
for those who hymn thee earnestly. * O blessed one, ** pray thou for thy flock.  
Thou didst offer a gift unto Christ * Who hath been born * and hath become a 
babe in the flesh, O venerable one: * thine honorable gray hairs, * adorned with the 
gifts of the priesthood, O father, * and stained with the blood of thy suffering, * the 
Orthodox Faith, * hope fervent and truly inviolable, ** and love unshaken, O 
venerable one.  
O venerable one, thou hast been shown to be * a tongue moved by the Spirit, * 
manifestly declaring true doctrines, * divinely exuding God-given grace, * a harp of 
piety played by God, * the immovable foundation of Orthodoxy, * a mouth flowing 
with honey, * a treasury of wisdom, ** the trumpet-voiced trumpet of the Churches.  
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The pre-eternal God, receiving flesh through thy blood, * hath shown thee to be 
an intercessor for all, O pure one; * wherefore, deliver thou thy servants * from all 
want and every evil circumstance, * and from the snares of the most evil enemy, * and 
grant that all who glorify and do thee homage ** may partake of the splendor of the 
elect.  
Be it known that on the Afterfeast of the Nativity of Christ and Theophany, 
Little Compline is chanted without the canon of the Theotokos. At Compline 
on December 26th, after “It is truly  meet” and the Trisagion through “Our 
Father”, we say the Kontakion for the synaxis of the Theotokos: “He Who was 
begotten of the. Father without mother before the morning star ...” 
 
At Nocturnes we read the usual Kathisma. After the first Trisagion, instead of 
“Behold, the Bridegroom ...,” we say the Troparion of the feast: “Thy nativity, 
O Christ our God ...,” after the second Trisagion, we say the Kontakion of the 
synaxis: “He Who was begotten of the Father ...,” then, “Lord, have mercy!”, 
12 times, and the dismissal. We do not say the prayers: “Remember, O Lord ...”  

--- PAGE 9 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”: 
When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, creation was enlightened, recognizing 
its Creator; and the choirs of the angels were amazed, beholding the Master, Who is 
inseparable from the Father, assuming the guise of a servant on earth. Glory be to 
God Who hath become incarnate! Glory be to Him Who hath been born on earth! 
Glory be to Him Whose good pleasure it was to save our race!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled...”: 
Why dost thou marvel, O Mary? Wherefore art thou in awe of what hath taken 
place within thee? “Because I have given birth within time to the timeless Son,” said 
she; “and am unaccustomed to conceiving a babe, since I have not known a man, 
how is it that I give birth to a Son? Who hath ever seen a seedless birthgiving? For 
where God desireth, the order of nature is overturned, as is it written.” Christ is born, 
that He might restore His image which of old had fallen!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
Both canons of the feast, the Irmos of each being chanted twice, with 12 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon I, the acrostic whereof is: “Having become man, Christ remaineth God as He 
was before”, the composition of Cosmas of Maiuma, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Christ is born, render ye glory. * Christ cometh from heaven, meet ye 
Him. * Christ is on earth, be ye exalted. * O all the earth, sing unto the Lord, * 
and sing praises in gladness, O ye people, * for He hath been glorified. 
That which, though fashioned in the image of God, became wholly corrupt 
through transgression, having fallen away from the divine life, hath the wise Creator 
restored, for He hath been glorified.  
The Creator, seeing mankind, whom He had fashioned with His own hands, 
perishing, descended, bowing down the heavens, and becoming truly incarnate, taking 
upon Himself all the essence of man, through the pure and divine Virgin, for He hath 
been glorified.  
Christ God, being the wisdom, Word, Power, Effulgence and Son of the Father, 
having made Himself unknowable to the powers of heaven, and even more so to 
those on earth, hath become a man and restored us, for He hath been glorified.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Canon II, the composition of John of Damascus, in Tone I:  
Irmos: The Master saved His people by working a wonder, * making solid the 
watery waves of the sea of old; * and having willingly been born of the Virgin, 
* He hath set before us a path leading to heaven. * Let us glorify Him Who is 
by nature equal to both the Father and mankind.  
Thy sacred womb, which was clearly depicted by the bush which burned without 
being consumed, bore the Word, mingling God with the form of a mortal man and 
loosing the wretched womb of Eve from the ancient bitter curse. Let us glorify Him, 
O ye mortals!  
The star plainly showed to the magi, Thee the merciful Word, existent before the 
sun, Who came to bring an end to sin, and wast wrapped in swaddling bands in a 
meager cave, and rejoicing, they beheld the very Lord Himself, as a man.  
Katavasia: The Festal Irmoi of both canons.  
ODE III 
Canon I  
Irmos: To the Son who was begotten of the Father * without change before all 
ages, * and in the last times, without seed, was made flesh of the Virgin, * to 
Christ our God let us cry aloud: * Thou hast raised up our horn, holy art Thou, 
O Lord. 
Adam, fashioned of dust, partook of a higher inspiration, yet he was led to stumble 
into corruption through a woman's deceit, seeing Christ born from a woman, he cried 
aloud: O Thou Who for my sake hast become like me, holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Lord Christ, mingling with clay, Thou didst conform Thyself thereto, imparting 
Thy divine essence to vile flesh by participating therein, becoming earthly, yet 
remaining God, and lifting up our horn: holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Bethlehem, thou king of the princes of Judah, be glad! For Christ Who doth 
shepherd Israel, seated on the shoulders of the cherubim, hath manifestly come forth 
from thee, and, having lifted up our horn, hath established His reign over all.  
Canon II.  
Irmos: Look upon the hymns of Thy servants, O Benefactor, * and humble the 
vaunted pride of the enemy; * bearing far above sin those who hymn Thee * 
making them unshakably firm by the foundation of faith, * O Thou Good One 
Who seest all.  
Having been deemed worthy to behold the supremely rich Offspring of the most 
pure Bride, which passeth understanding, the chorus of shepherds bowed down in 
awe-filled homage; and the ranks of incorporeal beings hymned Christ the King, Who 
became incarnate without seed.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
In His tender compassion, He Who reigneth over the heights of heaven became 
like us through the unwedded Maiden; the Word Who before was immaterial, was 
later clothed in material flesh, that He might draw to Himself the first-formed man, 
who had fallen.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
Ikos: Bethlehem hath opened Eden! We have found Joy in a secret place: come, 
and let us receive the things of paradise within the cave. There the unwatered Root 
hath blossomed, bearing forgiveness as its fruit. There an unfailing Wellspring hath 
been found, from whence David of old longed to drink. There the Virgin hath given 
birth to the Babe, straightway quenching the thirst of Adam and David. Wherefore, 
let us hasten to this place where now is born a young Child, the pre-eternal God!  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The first-fruits of the nations hath heaven brought to Thee Who liest as a babe in 
the manger, summoning the magi by the star; and they were in awe to see, not 
scepters or thrones, but utter poverty. For what is more lowly than a cave? What is 
more humble than the swaddling bands, wherein the richness of Thy divinity hath 
shone forth? O Lord, glory be to Thee!  
ODE IV 
Canon I  
Irmos: Rod of the root of Jesse, * and flower that blossomed from his stem, * 
O Christ, Thou hast sprung from the Virgin. * From the Mountain 
overshadowed by the forest * Thou hast come, made flesh from her that knew 
not wedlock, * O God who art not formed from matter. * Glory to Thy power, 
O Lord. 
O Christ Thou art He Whom Jacob foretold of old, as the expectation of the 
nations, and Who hath shone forth from the tribe of Judah, and come to overthrow 
the power of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria, transforming falsehood into 
godly faith. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Shining forth, a Star out of Jacob, O Master, Thou hast filled with joy the wise 
observers of the stars, the followers of the words of Balaam, the soothsayer of old; 
manifestly receiving the first-fruits of the nations who have entered in to worship 
Thee. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Like drops of rain falling upon the earth, and like the gentle rain upon the fleece, 
O Christ, Thou hast descended upon the womb of the Virgin. Ethiopia and Tharsis, 
the islands of Arabia and Saba, and they who rule all the land of the Medes, have 
fallen down before Thee, O Savior. Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon II  
Irmos: The renewal of the human race was hymned of old * and proclaimed 
beforehand by the Prophet Habbakuk, * who having ineffably been deemed 
worthy to behold in image; * the Word coming forth from the mountain, * the 
Virgin, as a little Babe, * for the restoration of the people.  
Willingly receiving flesh from the Virgin, the Most High hath issued forth as equal 
to men, to cleanse us of the venom of the serpent's head, leading all from the sunless 
gates of Hades to life-bearing light, in that He is God.  
The nations who of old were overwhelmed by corruption, having escaped the 
greatest enemy, lift up their hands with hymns of praise, honoring the one Christ as 
Benefactor, Who hath come to us in His mercy.  
Having sprouted forth from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, thou didst transcend the 
laws of human nature, giving birth to the pre-eternal Word of the Father, in that He 
Himself was well pleased to pass through thy sealed womb in His strange abasement.  
ODE V 
Canon I  
Irmos: As Thou art the God of peace and Father of compassions, * Thou hast 
sent unto us Thine Angel of great counsel, * granting us peace. * Wherefore 
guided towards the light of the knowledge of God, * and watching by night we 
glorify Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Submitting to be recorded among Thy servants at the command of Caesar, Thou 
hast freed us slaves from the enemy and sin, O Christ; and having abased Thyself for 
us, Thou hast rendered our nature divine through Thy union and sharing therein.  
Behold, the Virgin hath conceived in her womb, as was foretold of old, and hath 
given birth to God made man, yet remaineth a virgin. O ye sinners who for her sake 
have been reconciled with God, faithfully hymn her as the true Theotokos.  
Canon II  
Irmos: O Christ Who art our cleansing, come unto us, * who out of the night of 
the deeds of gloomy delusion, * valiantly hymn Thee as a Benefactor, * grant-
ing us an expeditious path, * ascending upon which we find glory.  
By His coming in the flesh the Master hath again cut down the cruel enmity 
directed against us, that He might destroy the soul-destroying ruler, uniting the world 
with the immaterial beings, making the Begetter accessible to creation.  
The people who of old were darkened have finally seen the light of the radiance of 
the Most High; and the Son bringeth the nations to the Father as an inheritance, 
bestowing ineffable grace where sin once flourished exceedingly. 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VI 
Canon I 
Irmos: The sea monster spat forth Jonah as it had received him, * like a babe 
from the womb: * while the Word, having dwelt in the Virgin and taken flesh, 
* came forth from her yet kept her incorrupt. * For being Himself not subject 
to decay. * He preserved His Mother free from all harm. 
Christ our God, Whom the Father begat before the morning star, hath come forth 
incarnate, from a womb. He Who ruleth over the most pure powers lieth in a manger 
of dumb beasts and is wrapped in swaddling-bands, loosing the knotted bonds of 
transgressions.  
A young Child, a Son, is born of the clay of Adam and given to the faithful: He is 
the Father and Prince of the age to come, and is called the Angel of great Counsel. 
He is the mighty God Who exerciseth dominion over all creation.  
Canon II  
Irmos: Dwelling in the uttermost depths of the sea, * Jonah besought Thee to 
come and still the tempest; * and I, pierced by the arrow of the tyrant, * chant 
unto Thee, O Christ * Thou Destroyer of evil, * do Thou come quickly unto 
my slothfulness!  
God the Word, Who from the beginning was with God, now strengtheneth that 
which of old was seen to be weakened, that he may preserve that which He Himself 
shares with us, straightway showing it to be free from the passions.  
He Who dwelleth in light, and, contrary to His dignity, hath now been well pleased 
to dwell in a manger, cometh forth from the loins of Abraham for the sake of us who 
have fallen into the deep darkness of transgressions, that, for the salvation of 
mankind, He might raise up His fallen children.  
Kontakion of the Synaxis, in Tone VI:  
He Who was born of the Father without mother * before the morning star * hath 
today become incarnate from thee on earth without a father; * wherefore, the star 
announceth glad tidings to the magi, * and the angels and shepherds hymn thine 
ineffable birthgiving, ** O thou who art full of grace.  
Ikos: O mystic vine, thou hast given rise to the uncultivated Grapes, for bearing 
Him in thine arms as on branches, thou didst say: “Thou art my Fruit, Thou art my 
Life! Wherefore, I have known that I yet am what I was. Thou art my God; for, 
beholding the seal of my virginity inviolate, I proclaim Thee the true Word Who hast 
become flesh. I have not known seed, and I acknowledge Thee to be the Destroyer of 
corruption; for I am pure, since Thou hast issued forth from me, and hast left my 
womb as Thou found it. Yea, I see that it is pure! Therefore, all creation joineth 
chorus, crying out to me: Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!”  

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VII 
Canon I  
Irmos: Scorning the impious decree of the godless one, * the Children brought 
up together in godliness * feared not the threat of fire, * but standing in the 
midst of the flames, they sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
 The piping shepherds received an awesome vision of light; for the glory of the 
Lord shone round about them, and an angel cried aloud: Sing ye, for Christ, the 
blessed God of your fathers, is born!  
Suddenly, at the voice of the angel, the armies of heaven cried out: “Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will among men! Christ hath shone forth: the 
blessed God of your fathers!”  
“What words are these?” said the shepherds; “Let us go and see what hath become 
of the blessed Christ!” And hastening to Bethlehem, they bowed down in worship 
with the Theotokos, chanting: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!”  
Canon II  
Irmos: Captured by the love of the King of all, * the children reviled the 
uncontrollable rage and ungodly blasphemies of the tyrant, * and the great fire 
submitted to them as they spake unto the Master saying: * Blessed art Thou 
throughout the ages  
The furnace which had been raised to a sevenfold heat savagely burnt the minions, 
but spared the youths who were wholly consumed with the fear of God; for the flame 
crowned them when the Lord freely granted them dew for the sake of their piety.  
O Christ our Helper, using Thine ineffable incarnation as a bulwark of defense, 
and having taken on our form, Thou hast put to shame the adversary of mankind, 
bearing the richness of Thy deification, which we hope for, having fallen from the 
heights into the darkness of the uttermost depths.  
Thou hast most mightily cast down sin, which is exalted in evil without restraint, 
frenzied from the perversion of the world; and those whom it formerly attracted hast 
Thou saved from its snares today, having become incarnate of Thine own will, O 
Benefactor.  
ODE VIII 
Canon I 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so the 
fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it had 
descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation bless the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
The daughter of Babylon carried off the captive children of David from Sion to 
herself; but now she hath sent her own children, the magi bearing gifts, to the God-
pleasing daughter of David, who prayeth. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
 The harps refused to play their sad songs, for the children of Sion would not sing 
in a strange land; but Christ, shining forth in Bethlehem, hath destroyed all the 
delusion of Babylon and her musical instruments. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: 
Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Babylon received the plunder of the kingdom of Sion and its captive riches; but 
Christ hath drawn its treasures to His Sion, guiding the star-observing kings by a star. 
Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!  
Canon II  
Irmos: The children who in the time of the Old Covenant * were cast into the 
fire, * prefigured the unconsumed womb of the Maiden, * which hath supra-
naturally given birth yet remaineth sealed; * and both wondrously working as a 
single miracle * moveth the people to hymn the Grace of each. 
Mankind, having fled the destructive delusion of becoming divine, unceasingly 
hymneth the Word Who hath abased Himself, and like the youths and all creation, 
with fear and trembling offereth meager praise, being corrupt, but wisely enduring.  
Thou hast come, O Restoration of the nations, to bring lost human nature back 
from the hills of the wilderness to the flowered pastures; that Thou mightest 
extinguish the violent power of the manslayer, having by providence appeared as God 
and man.  
At Ode IX we do not chant the Magnificat, but instead, sing the refrains, as on the 
feast itself  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
ODE IX 
Canon I  
Irmos: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is heaven; * 
the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in which Christ 
God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and magnify. 
Then the second choir chanteth the same refrain, and the irmos. To each of the 
remaining 6 refrains we assign a Troparion.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, God Who was born in the flesh of the Virgin.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the King Who was born in the cave.  
The magi beheld the excellent course of the strange star which had newly 
appeared, illumining the heavens and marking the birth of Christ the King in 
Bethlehem, for our salvation.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, God Who is worshipped by the magi.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, Him Who was proclaimed to the magi by the star.  
The star revealed the newborn infant King to the magi who said: “Where is He, 
for we have come to worship Him?” But Herod who fought against God, enraged, 
was troubled, seeking to slay the Christ.  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the only pure Virgin Theotokos, who gave birth 
to Christ the King.  
Refrain: The magi and shepherds have come to worship Christ Who hath been 
born in the city of Bethlehem.  
Herod inquired concerning the time of the star, following whose course the magi 
worshipped Christ with gifts in Bethlehem; but, guided thereby to their homeland, 
they left the cruel murderer of the infants behind in mockery.  
Then the first choir chanteth the refrain of Canon II:  
Refrain: Today the Virgin giveth birth to the Master within the cave.  
Irmos: From fear it may be easier, * for us to prefer silence, * for though not 
fraught with danger, O Virgin, * it is difficult to fashion hymns fittingly 
wrought for thee. * Yet, O Mother, grant us the power to chant in such a way, 
* insofar as it is our will.  
The second choir chanteth the refrain 
Refrain: Today the Master is born as a babe of the Virgin Mother.  
And it likewise chanteth the Irmos: 
Irmos: From fear it may be easier ..., 
Then the refrains are chanted with the Troparia, as follows:  
Refrain: Today the shepherds see the Savior wrapped in swaddling-bands and 
lying in a manger.  
Refrain: Today the Master, Who is intangible is wrapped in rags as a babe.  
Refrain: Today all creation rejoiceth and is glad, for Christ is born of the Virgin 
Maiden.  
O pure Mother, having beheld the indistinct images and dim shadows of the Word 
Who hath newly appeared through the closed gates, but mindful now of His true 
radiance, we bless thy womb as is meet.  
Refrain: The heavenly hosts proclaim to the world the Savior, Lord and Master 
Who hath been born.  
Instead of Glory ..., Magnify, O my soul, the might of the indivisible Godhead 
in three Hypostases!  
Instead of Both now ..., Magnify, O my soul, her who hath delivered us from 
the curse.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Having attained their desire and been deemed worthy to see the advent of God, 
the people who delight in Christ are now consoled by this, insofar as thou bestowest 
life-bearing grace to those who worship this glory, O pure Virgin.  
Then both choirs, having come down together, chant the first refrain of the 
feast, and the Irmos of Canon I, and afterward the first refrain of Canon II, and 
its Irmos. And all bow down. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
Katavasia I: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
Refrain: Today the Master is born as a babe of the Virgin Mother.  
Katavasia II: From fear it may be easier, * for us to prefer silence, * for though 
not fraught with danger, O Virgin, * it is difficult to fashion hymns fittingly 
wrought for thee. * Yet, O Mother, grant us the power to chant in such a way, 
* insofar as it is our will.  
Exapostilarion of the feast: 
From on high our Savior, the Dayspring of the East hath visited us and we who 
are in shadowy darkness have truly found Him; for the Lord hath been born from the 
Virgin. (Thrice)  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Be glad, O ye righteous! Rejoice, O heavens! Leap up, ye mountains for Christ 
hath been born! The Virgin sitteth, holding the incarnate Word of God in her bosom, 
like unto the cherubim. Shepherds marvel at Him Who hath been born; the magi 
offer gifts to the Master; and the angels say, chanting: O unapproachable Lord, glory 
be to Thee!  
O Virgin Theotokos having given birth to the Savior, thou hast abolished the 
ancient curse of Eve; for thou didst become the Mother of Him in Whom the Father 
is well pleased bearing the incarnate Word of God in thy bosom. This mystery is not 
subject to testing but with faith alone we all glorify it, crying out with thee and saying: 
O ineffable Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Come let us hymn the Mother of the Savior, who even after giving birth wast 
revealed to be a Virgin. Rejoice O animate city of God the King, wherein Christ 
making His abode, hath wrought salvation! We chant with Gabriel and offer up glory 
with the magi saying: O Theotokos, entreat Him Who became incarnate from thee, 
that we be saved!  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
The Father was well pleased; the Word became flesh; the Virgin gave birth to God 
incarnate; the star proclaimeth Him; the magi offer Him worship; the shepherds 
marvel, and creation rejoiceth.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Today invisible nature is joined to men through the Virgin! Today the boundless 
Essence is wrapped in swaddling bands in Bethlehem! Today God guideth the magi 
by the star, to offer Him homage, announcing beforehand His own three-day burial 
in their gold, myrrh and frankincense. To Him do we chant: O Christ God Who hast 
become incarnate through the Virgin, save Thou our souls!  
Both now ..., the composition of John the monk, in Tone II:  
Today Christ is born of the Virgin in Bethlehem! Today the Beginningless 
beginneth to be and the Word becometh incarnate! The hosts of heaven rejoice, and 
earth and men are glad! The magi offer gifts to the Master, and the shepherds marvel 
at Him Who hath been born! And we cry out unceasingly: Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace, good will among men!  
Great Doxology. After the Trisagion, the Troparion of the feast; litanies and 
dismissal. First Hour and final dismissal.  
 
AT THE HOURS  
Troparion of the feast; Kontakion of the synaxis.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 8 Troparia: 4 from ODE III of Canon I, and 4 from ODE 
VI of Canon II.  
Adam, fashioned of dust, partook of a higher inspiration, yet he was led to stumble 
into corruption through a woman's deceit, seeing Christ born from a woman, he cried 
aloud: O Thou Who for my sake hast become like me, holy art Thou O Lord! (Twice) 
O Lord Christ, mingling with clay, Thou didst conform Thyself thereto, imparting 
Thy divine essence to vile flesh by participating therein, becoming earthly, yet 
remaining God, and lifting up our horn: holy art Thou O Lord!  
O Bethlehem, thou king of the princes of Judah, be glad! For Christ Who doth 
shepherd Israel, seated on the shoulders of the cherubim, hath manifestly come forth 
from thee, and, having lifted up our horn, hath established His reign over all.  
God the Word, Who from the beginning was with God, intending to preserve the 
nature which He Himself shareth with us, now strengtheneth it, which from of old 
was weak, by another fellowship with it, straightway showing it to be free from the 
passions. (Twice) 
He Who dwelleth in light, and, contrary to His dignity, hath now been well pleased 
to dwell in a manger, cometh forth for our sake from the loins of Abraham for us 
who have darkenedly fallen into the darkness of transgressions, that, for the salvation 
of men, He might raise up His children who have fallen low. (Twice) 
After the entrance, the Introit:  
O Son of God Who wast born of the Virgin, save us who chant unto Thee: 
Alleluia!  
And thus do we chant up to and including the apodosis of the feast. 
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the synaxis, in Tone VI:  
He Who was born of the Father without mother * before the morning star * hath 
today become incarnate from thee on earth * without a father; * wherefore, the star 
announceth glad tidings to the magi, * and the angels and shepherds hymn thine 
ineffable birthgiving, ** O thou who art full of grace.  
 
The Trisagion is sung.  
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: The Song of the Theotokos: My soul doth magnify 
the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold, 
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, § 306 (HEB 2:11-18)  
Brethren: He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, Saying, I will declare thy name unto 
my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee. And again, I will 
put my trust in him. And again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me. 
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself 
likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the 
power of death, that is, the devil; And deliver them who through fear of death were 
all their lifetime subject to bondage. For verily he took not on him the nature of 
angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behooved 
him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high 
priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. 
For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are 
tempted.  
 Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy 
holiness.  
Verse: The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, and He will not annul it.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, §4 (MT 2:13-23)  
When the wise men departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in 
a dream, saying, Arise, and take up the young child and his mother, and flee into 
Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child 
to destroy him. When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and 
departed into Egypt: and was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my 
son. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding 
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the 
coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had 
diligently inquired of the wise men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by 
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, In Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation, and 
weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be 
comforted, because they are not. But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the 
Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the young child 

--- PAGE 21 ---
and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the 
young child's life. And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came 
into the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the 
room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned 
of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee: and he came and dwelt 
in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, 
He shall be called a Nazarene.  
 
In place of “Meet it is” we chant the following  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
Katavasia I: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
 
 Communion Verse: The Lord hath sent redemption unto His people.  
 
 
