--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 30th DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
AFTERFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST  
COMMEMORATION OF THE HOLY MARTYR ANYSIA & THE VENERABLE 
ZOTICUS  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE MELANIA IS TRANSFERRED TO 
THIS DAY BECAUSE OF THE APODOSIS OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 3 of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant; among the martyrs ...”: 
Made radiant by the splendor of virginity, * O all-praised one, * thou didst shine 
forth in the struggles of martyrdom; * for, refusing to worship the sun, * thou didst 
endure unjust slaughter, * and, dyed with thy blood, * thou hast come to stand before 
the Sun of glory, * illumined by the splendors ** emitted by Him, O crowned one.  
Showing forth heartfelt love, O glorious one, * thou didst drench the earth * with 
tears of compunction, * and wipe the footstool of Christ dry with thy hair, * 
contemplating and looking toward Him as transcendent, * Whom thou didst desire; * 
and, touching His feet noetically, * thou didst enlighten thy soul ** with most divine 
visions.  
Having distributed thy wealth * and provided for the poor, * thou didst betroth 
thyself to thine incorrupt Bridegroom, O all-glorious one, * and as a dowry didst 
bring unto Him * the streams of thy blood * and the endurance of sufferings * which 
thou didst bear, O Anysia. * Wherefore the Most High hath set thee to dwell in His 
bridal-chamber ** as a passion-bearer and martyr.  
And 3 Stichera of the venerable Melania, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Called from on high ...”:  
O thou who hast enrolled in the choirs of the angels, * when divine love set thee 
aflame * and caused thee to soar far above visible things * because of thy dispassion 
and purity, * then with words of trust in God * thou didst bring thy spouse to life, * 
putting aside the fleeting and inconstant tumult of life. * Wherefore, having found 
with him * everlasting life and delight, * thou prayest to the Master, ** that He save 
our souls.  
Desiring the life of the angels * when thou didst spit out sweet food, * having 
trained thyself in abstinence and the keeping of vigil, * in lying on the ground and in 
purity, * thou didst become the most pure vessel * of the divine Spirit, * adorned for 
Him with all-splendid gifts, * O all-honored one. * Wherefore, thou didst draw the 
people toward His divine love, O Melania, * and didst lead them to the Master, ** the 
Savior of our souls. 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Adorned with the beauties of the virtues, * when thou didst fulfill the word of the 
Savior, * thou didst give to the poor and wretched, * distributing ten thousands of 
golden coins, * and didst receive heavenly riches, * being enriched forever * with 
righteousness, * incorruption and deliverance. * Wherefore, we honor thy repose * 
and earnestly entreat thee: Entreat the Creator, ** that He enlighten our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the feast, in Tone I:  
“Glory to God in the highest!” is heard from the incorporeal ones in Bethlehem 
today, addressed to Him Who was well pleased to become Peace on earth. Now the 
Virgin hath become more spacious than the heavens, for Light hath shone forth upon 
darkened souls and lifted up the lowly who chant with the angels: Glory to God in 
the highest!  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”:  
Christ, shining forth * as a star from Jacob, * hath enlightened the nations * with 
the light of divine knowledge. ** Let us glorify Him!  
Verse: From the womb before the morning star have I begotten Thee. * The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent.  
Rejoice, O Bethlehem, * thou city of David, * for He Who was begotten of the 
Father * without mother, hath become incarnate within thee ** without father from 
the pure Virgin, the divine Maiden.  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: * Sit Thou at My right hand.  
The Word of the Father, * assuming flesh, hath been born, * wrapped in swad-
dling clothes * and lain in a manger, ** releasing me from irrationality.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I:  
Beholding that which He had created according to His image and likeness 
corrupted by disobedience, Jesus descended, bowing down the heavens, and made 
His abode in the Virgin's womb without undergoing change, that in her He might 
restore Adam Who had become corrupt, yet crieth: Glory to Thine appearance, O my 
Redeemer and God!  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of our venerable father Zoticus, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I  
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red Sea: * 
for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
O Zoticus, entreat Christ, that He enlighten from on high my darkened thoughts, 
that I may hymn thee worthily.  
Thou didst show thyself to be an emulator of the angels by thy life on earth, O 
divinely wise one, spurning the beauties of life as was fitting.  
Theotokion: The race of mankind is edified because of thee, O Virgin, for, without 
leaving the highest, God descended to earth.  
ODE III  
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou art 
the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Come, ye sojourners, and let us joyfully lift up our voices today, blessing Zoticus 
on this, his splendid festival.  
Like Abraham in his day, thou didst set up a tent as thy dwelling-place, receiving 
all the poor and richly nurturing them.  
Theotokion: In thy birth giving, O all-pure one, thou didst cause every tempest to 
cease; wherefore, rulers vanquish the enemy, reveling in peace.  
ODE IV  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
This radiant solemnity of the venerable Zoticus hath now shone forth, summoning 
all to the celebration of the nativity of Christ.  
Having been adorned with miracles, thou hast left us most glorious miracles, thine 
honored corrections on earth, O all-blessed one, as a divine model.  
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, we have found thee to be a mercy-seat and 
impregnable refuge amid battles, and rulers bear thy dominion, O pure one.  
ODE V  
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine arm 
raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
O wondrous one, adornment of the virtues, thy precious corrections have been 
shown to be a divine home and vesture for the naked.  
Healing leprosy, O sacred father, thou didst make thine honored house into a 
hospital, wherein every infirmity is treated as is meet.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Great and adored is the mystery which was manifest within thee, O 
Ever-virgin Theotokos; for, lo! we mortals have truly become reconciled with God.  
ODE VI  
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * disquieten 
me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but do Thou 
stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * and save 
me, O my Guide.  
All of us, the faithful, know thee to be a temple of the Spirit, O most glorious one, 
for thou didst make thy house, wherein every ailment is expelled by thy prayers, into a 
magnificent temple.  
Emulating Abraham, thou didst render hospitality to strangers on earth, most 
blessedly receiving the homeless, the naked, the wandering, the halt, the poor and the 
sojourners.  
Theotokion: He Who showed forth the cave as heaven on earth, O Virgin, hath 
shown thee to be a heavenly temple surrounded by angelic choirs chanting with faith: 
Glory in the highest to thine Offspring!  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
With the dew of abstinence, O venerable Zoticus, thou didst extinguish the 
furnace of the passions, having been enriched with the gift of healing by God; and 
thou didst receive the faithful, to heal their cruel pangs and to drive away from them 
hordes of the demons. Wherefore, with gladness we honor thee.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our 
God, throughout the ages'.  
Thou hast joined all the venerable and the choirs of the incorporeal ones, O all- 
blessed Zoticus, and with them criest aloud: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages!  
By power and grace, O divinely wise one, thou wast shown to be the protector of 
widows and the weak, and the father of orphans, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord our God, throughout the ages!  
Theotokion: O Theotokos, destroy the might of the barbarians and save thy 
people; and make steadfast faithful rulers, who cry aloud: Blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb, O all-pure one!  
ODE VIII  
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * ‘ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages’. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 These trophies of victory, these corrections, and the tears of poor women have 
shown thy temple to be higher than heaven, and opened to thee the gates of the 
kingdom. For thou didst cry out with faith: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou gavest neither sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine eyelids, O right 
wondrous God-pleaser, until thou didst utterly complete thy godly task as a noetic 
paradise of Christ, crying: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Theotokion: Becoming man for our salvation, Thou didst come to us in the tender 
compassion of Thy mercy, making Thine abode within the cave, wrapped in 
swaddling bands; and Thou hast raised mortals up from the passions, who chant 
together: Hymn the Lord ye priests; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages!  
ODE IX  
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Grace hath been given thee by God, O father, to heal the infirmities of the poor, 
the lame and those with withered limbs; and faithfully receiving them as ones beloved 
of Christ, with them thou dost ever rejoice, abiding in the bosom of Abraham.  
Thou didst feed to satiety every stranger, naked person and wanderer, O father, 
and with the patriarchs and the righteous thou dost now ever splendidly rejoice where 
Christ is the wealth and delight, the eternal hope of the saved, the treasure of all.  
Theotokion: As the Mother of God, as the intercessor and haven of those who 
honor thee, as the refuge of all who have recourse to thee, O Virgin, as the joy of 
kings, their glory, confirmation and worthy crown, O Theotokos, save thou thy 
people.  
Stichera of the venerable one, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
In character thou didst show thyself to be like Abraham, O wise one, for thou 
didst make the abundance of thy home accessible to all, giving to those in need and 
presenting alms to the poor.  
Christ showed thee to be a receiver of widows and the poor, the fervent helper of 
the afflicted, the advocate of the oppressed, the champion and deliverer of those who 
praise thee, O our father.  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Strengthened with power and adorned with the grace of Him Who was born in the 
cave, O Zoticus, with asceticism and abstinence thou didst triumph over the passions 
and hast received trophies of victory.  
Both now ..., in the same tone: 
The Virgin who gave birth to Thee without seed, O Christ God, laid Thee in the 
manger as a babe, and the choirs of the incorporeal ones cried out from on high: 
Glory to the Creator and God of all!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
 Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Thrice)  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “When the stone had been sealed ...”:  
The Son Who with the Father and the Spirit is everlasting, Who is the Wisdom 
and Understanding from before all ages, desired to be born of the Virgin for our sake 
in the latter times, that He might save the world from the tyranny of the alien foe. 
Glory be to Thee Who wast born in the flesh! Glory be to Thee Who wast thus well 
pleased! Glory be to Thee Who hast delivered us by Thy nativity!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was commanded ...”:  
Let heaven rejoice and let the earth be glad, for the Lamb of God hath been born 
on earth, granting deliverance to the world. The Word Who is in the bosom of the 
Father hath issued forth from the Virgin without seed. At Him the magi marveled, 
beholding God in the flesh; and the shepherds cried aloud: Glory be to Him Who 
alone is truly God!  
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
O incorrupt and divine Glory, Thou issue forth from the Virgin's womb and 
preserve inviolate her who gave birth to Thee; Thou didst rest in the manger as upon 
a throne, and didst show the cave to be a beautiful palace. Shepherds hymned Thee as 
the King of all, and the star made its journey showing the magi a divine light. 
Wherefore, we all cry out to Thee: O Master Christ our God, send down remission of 
sins upon those who with faith celebrate Thy divine nativity!  
Canon of the feast, with 6 Troparia; and two canons, one for each of the saints, with 
a total of 8 Troparia.  
ODE I  
Canon of the feast, the composition of John the monk, in Tone I:  
Irmos: The Master saved His people by working a wonder, * making solid the 
watery waves of the sea of old; * and having willingly been born of the Virgin, 
* He hath set before us a path leading to heaven. * Let us glorify Him Who is 
by nature equal to both the Father and mankind.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thy sacred womb, which was clearly depicted by the bush which burned without 
being consumed, bore the Word, mingling God with the form of a mortal man and 
loosing the wretched womb of Eve from the ancient bitter curse. Let us glorify Him, 
O ye mortals!  
The star plainly showed to the magi, Thee the merciful Word, existent before the 
sun, Who came to bring an end to sin, and wast wrapped in swaddling bands in a 
meager cave, and rejoicing, they beheld the very Lord Himself, as a man.  
Canon of the holy martyr Anysia, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone IV:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
As thou standest in joy before the Father of lights, O all-praised one, send down 
light upon me who hymn thy radiant memory, driving away the storm of my passions 
by thy prayers.  
With abstinence, O divinely wise one, thou didst renew the meadow of thy soul, 
producing the grain of martyrdom for the Husbandman Who preserved thee and 
breathed strength into thee, O right wondrous virgin martyr.  
With thy hands which bestow riches far more precious than corruptible wealth, 
thou didst receive the richness of life which in nowise passeth away, a treasure which 
cannot be taken away, and heavenly glory, O martyr.  
Theotokion: For us the Creator of all is born of thee today, O thou who knewest 
not wedlock; and He Who hath wrapped the sea in mist is wrapped in swaddling 
bands, O Ever-virgin Mother.  
Canon of the venerable Melania, the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Illumining me with the radiant supplications of the venerable Melania, cleanse me 
who am wholly blackened by the darkness of the passions, O Lover of mankind, and 
breathe discourse into me that I may honor her.  
Diligently shouldering thy cross, thou didst ardently follow after Him Who 
endured voluntary crucifixion for thy sake, O all-blessed one, and didst keep His 
justifications.  
Thou didst utterly turn away from the violent attachment of thy parents and the 
pleasures of the flesh, O divinely wise one, desiring the beauty of Christ, thy Lover, 
alone. Him do all who partake of discourse desire.  
Theotokion: He Who is rich maketh Himself poor, enriching with divinity me who 
before wickedly impoverished myself with intemperance. Behold, He Who is 
beginningless receiveth a beginning, being born of the divine Virgin Maiden.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE III 
 Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Look upon the hymns of Thy servants, O Benefactor, * and humble the 
vaunted pride of the enemy; * bearing far above sin those who hymn Thee * 
making them unshakably firm by the foundation of faith, * O Thou Good One 
Who seest all.  
Having been deemed worthy to behold the supremely rich Offspring of the most 
pure Bride, which passeth understanding, the chorus of shepherds bowed down in 
awe-filled homage; and the ranks of incorporeal beings hymned Christ the King, Who 
became incarnate without seed.  
In His tender compassion, He Who reigneth over the heights of heaven became 
like us through the unwedded Maiden; the Word Who before was immaterial, was 
later clothed in material flesh, that He might draw to Himself the first-formed man, 
who had fallen.  
Canon of the holy martyr  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Thy Creator, desiring thy spiritual beauty, truly betrothed Himself to thee, a goodly 
and blameless bride, O martyr.  
Loving the sufferings and death of the Dispassionate One Who died for our sake, 
O honored martyr, thou didst die a martyr's death.  
As a spiritual holocaust, as a sacrifice pure and perfect, did she who loved Thy 
Cross offer herself to Thee, O God.  
Theotokion: Thou wast a habitation containing the infinite Creator, O most pure 
and joyous one, who contained Him in the flesh.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more holy 
than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
O glorious one, having withdrawn from base desires, of thine own will thou didst 
piously give thy desire wholly over to the everlasting things which are to come.  
Thou didst adorn thy senses with earnest supplications, and didst become wholly 
radiant through the effulgence of the Spirit, having emulated in thy body the life of 
the immaterial ones.  
Whether by thy speech or by thy silence, thou wast an example, the confirmation 
of the unsure, a model for monastics, O divinely wise Melania. Wherefore, we hymn 
thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: He Who clothes the heavens with clouds is swaddled of His own will 
and desire; and held in the arms of the Virgin, pulling me from the hands of the 
adversary.  
Sessional Hymn of the holy martyr, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up upon the Cross ...”:  
Gaining dominion over the carnal passions, thou didst become a queen through 
life-creating sufferings, piously dyeing in thy blood a robe of purple for thyself, O 
honored Anysia. Wherefore, thou hast been revealed to be the immaculate bride of 
the King of all. Deliver from misfortunes us who celebrate thy glorious memory.  
Glory ..., Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Keeping the divine commandments with zeal, thou didst give to the poor, 
distributing tens of thousands of golden coins; and taking thy cross upon thy 
shoulders, O Melania, with thy husband thou didst faithfully follow after Christ Who 
was crucified in the flesh, our only God.  
Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the feast, in the same tone: 
All creation now rejoiceth in godliness, for Christ the Lord, the Son of God, is 
born of the pure Virgin, making the whole human race immortal and lifting the curse 
of our first mother Eve. Wherefore, we offer hymnody unto Him as to our 
Benefactor.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The renewal of the human race was hymned of old * and proclaimed 
beforehand by the Prophet Habbakuk, * who having ineffably been deemed 
worthy to behold in image; * the Word coming forth from the mountain, * the 
Virgin, as a little Babe, * for the restoration of the people.  
Willingly receiving flesh from the Virgin, the Most High hath issued forth as equal 
to men, to cleanse us of the venom of the serpent's head, leading all from the sunless 
gates of Hades to life-bearing light, in that He is God.  
The nations who of old were overwhelmed by corruption, having escaped the 
greatest enemy, lift up their hands with hymns of praise, honoring the one Christ as 
Benefactor, Who hath come to us in His mercy.  
Having sprouted forth from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, thou didst transcend the 
laws of human nature, giving birth to the pre-eternal Word of the Father, in that He 
Himself was well pleased to pass through thy sealed womb in His strange abasement.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * Glory be to 
Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Following Thy life-bearing footsteps, O Master Christ, Thy handmaiden, who 
hymneth Thee, was wounded by a spear in the side and unwaveringly passed through 
the whirling blades.  
Shining with the splendors of martyrdom, crowned with a wreath of incorruption, 
O all-praised martyr Anysia, thou standest, rejoicing, before Christ, thy Bridegroom.  
Vanquishing with thy martyr's opposition him who caused our first mother Eve to 
trip, thou didst cast him down, showing him to be impotent, and chanting to Christ: 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Theotokion: He Who created the immaterial beings is born of thee today as a man 
in the body, O Mother of God. To Him do we chant: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Mortifying the carnal lusts with abstinence, O all-honored one, thou didst have the 
Life of the living dwelling within thee. And passing on from the earth, thou madest 
thine abode therein, delighting in the kingdom of heaven.  
Having distributed myriads of gold pieces to the hungry, truly thou didst never 
horde them in coffers which mould away forever; rather they have purchased for thee 
an everlasting sojourn.  
The richness of thine almsgiving was like a river watering the heart of each pauper, 
O glorious one, washing away the dirt of poverty; they are riches which cannot be 
stolen, and which have won for thee inexhaustible treasure in the heavens.  
Theotokion: Having submitted to lust like an irrational beast, I have joined the 
beasts, even though I have been endowed with reason. O thou who hast given birth 
to the everlasting Word, disdain me not, who am ever perishing.  
ODE V  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: O Christ Who art our cleansing, come unto us, * who out of the night of 
the deeds of gloomy delusion, * valiantly hymn Thee as a Benefactor, * grant-
ing us an expeditious path, * ascending upon which we find glory.  
By His coming in the flesh the Master hath again cut down the cruel enmity 
directed against us, that He might destroy the soul-destroying ruler, uniting the world 
with the immaterial beings, making the Begetter accessible to creation.  
The people who of old were darkened have finally seen the light of the radiance of 
the Most High; and the Son bringeth the nations to the Father as an inheritance, 
bestowing ineffable grace where sin once flourished exceedingly. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Knowing Thee, O Lord, to be the well-spring of salvation, Thy martyr drained the 
cup of salvation with a sure heart.  
O passion-bearer of the Lord, heifer of Christ, God-pleasing whole-burnt offering, 
sacrificed to God: pray thou that we be saved.  
Having most clearly drawn nigh unto the great Light, thou hast become light, 
illumining those who celebrate thy radiant memory.  
Theotokion: We wield thee as an invincible weapon against the enemy, O Bride of 
God, having acquired thee as the confirmation and hope of our salvation.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Utterly erasing the ugliness of the passions from thy soul, O honored one, with the 
ink of abstinence thou didst record dispassion and unfeigned love therein.  
Manifestly like unto a bright mirror, O glorious one, thou didst radiantly receive 
the gifts of the divine Spirit, illumining the faithful with the splendor of thy life.  
Having quenched the burning of the passions with abstinence, thou didst set thy 
soul aflame, shining forth in thy whole life and driving away the darkness of the 
demons.  
Theotokion: The Virgin gave birth in the city of Bethlehem to Emmanuel, Who 
openeth Eden, which of old was closed to me because of the deception of the serpent 
and mine ancestors' failure to abstain from eating.  
ODE VI 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Dwelling in the uttermost depths of the sea, * Jonah besought Thee to 
come and still the tempest; * and I, pierced by the arrow of the tyrant, * chant 
unto Thee, O Christ * Thou Destroyer of evil, * do Thou come quickly unto 
my slothfulness!  
God the Word, Who from the beginning was with God, now strengtheneth that 
which of old was seen to be weakened, that he may preserve that which He Himself 
shares with us, straightway showing it to be free from the passions.  
He Who dwelleth in light, and, contrary to His dignity, hath now been well pleased 
to dwell in a manger, cometh forth from the loins of Abraham for the sake of us who 
have fallen into the deep darkness of transgressions, that, for the salvation of 
mankind, He might raise up His fallen children.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Having received manly intelligence in a woman's body, O martyr, thou didst go 
forth to do battle with the incorporeal foe, slaying them with the sword of patience.  
With floods of blood thou didst dry up the sea of false religion, and didst water the 
honored Church of Christ, O passion-bearer Anysia, thou boast of virgins.  
Thou didst pass over the sea of struggles without foundering or sinking; 
wherefore, thou hast hastened to the tranquil haven, and dost enjoy true serenity, O 
most glorious one.  
Theotokion: He Who created man in His own image, in His great tender 
compassion hath edified him, clothing Himself wholly in him through thee, O Virgin 
Mother of God.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * 'I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons' * by 
the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Thou didst pass through the tempest of life without foundering, steered by the 
hand of Him Who created all things by his word, O Melania, thereby reaching the 
harbor of salvation.  
All the fiery darts of sin were burned up by the sparks of thine ardent love for the 
Lord of all, and the malice of the demons hath been utterly destroyed. 
With thy mind deified by union with that which is higher, thou wast separated 
from love of the flesh by the hand of the Almighty; wherefore, thou didst undertake 
labors of asceticism.  
Theotokion: The Lord Who was born of the Virgin deifieth me and, wrapped in 
swaddling bands, He hath wrought the unbinding of my transgressions. He Who 
cannot be contained by anything hath been contained in a cave.  
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
Ikos: Bethlehem hath opened Eden! We have found Joy in a secret place: come, 
and let us receive the things of paradise within the cave. There the unwatered Root 
hath blossomed, bearing forgiveness as its fruit. There an unfailing Wellspring hath 
been found, from whence David of old longed to drink. There the Virgin hath given 
birth to the Babe, straightway quenching the thirst of Adam and David. Wherefore, 
let us hasten to this place where now is born a young Child, the pre-eternal God!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: Captured by the love of the King of all, * the children reviled the 
uncontrollable rage and ungodly blasphemies of the tyrant, * and the great fire 
submitted to them as they spake unto the Master saying: * Blessed art Thou 
throughout the ages  
The furnace which had been raised to a sevenfold heat savagely burnt the minions, 
but spared the youths who were wholly consumed with the fear of God; for the flame 
crowned them when the Lord freely granted them dew for the sake of their piety.  
O Christ our Helper, using Thine ineffable incarnation as a bulwark of defense, 
and having taken on our form, Thou hast put to shame the adversary of mankind, 
bearing the richness of Thy deification, which we hope for, having fallen from the 
heights into the darkness of the uttermost depths.  
Thou hast most mightily cast down sin, which is exalted in evil without restraint, 
frenzied from the perversion of the world; and those whom it formerly attracted hast 
Thou saved from its snares today, having become incarnate of Thine own will, O 
Benefactor.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
The torrents of tortures which flowed forth in no wise shook the house of thy 
soul, which was made noetically firm by thy confession of Christ, O martyr, who 
cried aloud: Blessed art Thou O God!  
Having come to know Christ, the Sun of righteousness, O martyr, thou didst not 
wish to offer sacrifice wickedly to the sun when commanded to do so by the tyrant; 
rather, thou didst chant: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having dyed a purple robe for thyself in thy sacred blood, O martyr, thou didst 
crown thy head with a wreath of victory; and now thou standest in gladness before 
God, the immortal King.  
Theotokion: He Who wrapped the sky in clouds and the earth in mist, having been 
born from thy womb, is wrapped in swaddling bands and laid in a manger, O all- 
immaculate Mother of God, saving those who know thee to be the Theotokos.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Bearing the yoke of Christ with thy husband, O God-bearer, ye renewed your 
souls with the plough of prayers, and, having cultivated the field of good works, ye 
delight forever in glory on high.  
Like the olive-tree of the psalms which was planted in the house of God, thou 
dost mystically anoint with the oil of thy pangs the hearts and faces of those who 
praise thy struggles with faith, O venerable one.  
Having extinguished the furnace of the passions with the dew of abstinence, with 
the rain of thy prayers thou hast poured forth an abyss of healings, engulfing the 
onslaughts of the passion of those who honor thee, O Melania.  
Theotokion: David called thee a fleece, O pure one, for thou didst receive the Rain 
of heaven Who drieth up the torrents of iniquity and watereth the minds of the 
faithful, which have withered up because of sin. 
ODE VIII  
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: The children who in the time of the Old Covenant * were cast into the 
fire, * prefigured the unconsumed womb of the Maiden, * which hath supra-
naturally given birth yet remaineth sealed; * and both wondrously working as a 
single miracle * moveth the people to hymn the Grace of each. 
Mankind, having fled the destructive delusion of becoming divine, unceasingly 
hymneth the Word Who hath abased Himself, and like the youths and all creation, 
with fear and trembling offereth meager praise, being corrupt, but wisely enduring.  
Thou hast come, O Restoration of the nations, to bring lost human nature back 
from the hills of the wilderness to the flowered pastures; that Thou mightest 
extinguish the violent power of the manslayer, having by providence appeared as God 
and man.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Loving the commands of the Almighty constantly, thou didst distribute thy wealth 
to the widows, orphans and paupers, and to all in need, O honored virgin, and didst 
seek the cup of honorable martyrdom; and having drained it, thou didst cause desire 
to cease.  
As a dowry thou didst bring to Christ fasting and tears, the mortification of the 
passions, the shedding of thy blood and the piercing of thy side; wherefore, He Who 
ageth not Himself giveth thee a crown, an incorrupt bridal chamber and heavenly 
glory.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou dwellest in light with the angels and the ranks of virgins, celebrating with the 
assemblies of martyrs, gazing upon thy Bridegroom face to face, sharing in radiant 
glory and crying out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Theotokion: Behold, now a ruler and prince hath manifestly failed from the tribe 
of Judah, for thou, O all-immaculate one, hast given birth to Christ, the expectation 
of the nations, for Whom the things of old were stored up. To Him do we chant: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having made thy heart and body a temple for the supremely divine Trinity, O 
right glorious one, thou didst erect divine temples, in which thou hast assembled 
ranks of virgins and choirs of monastics, who chant together and supremely exalt 
Christ throughout all ages.  
Through almsgiving thou didst acquire mercy, and distributing thy wealth, thou 
gavest it to the poor. Thy righteousness abideth eternally, as doth the reward thou 
didst win through it, O venerable God-bearer Melania. Wherefore, we honor thee as 
truly victorious.  
Shining with understanding, courage, chastity and divine righteousness, O 
venerable one, thou didst possess that humility which exalted thee to the heights of 
heaven, and wherewith thou didst cast down the haughty serpent. Wherefore, we 
honor thee as truly victorious.  
Theotokion: Waves of the passions beset me and the abyss of despair engulfs me. 
Rescue me, O all-immaculate Mother, and I shall be saved; for thou hast given birth 
to the Lord and Savior Who is laid in a manger as a babe, and Whom we supremely 
exalt throughout all ages.  
ODE IX 
Canon of the feast  
Irmos: From fear it may be easier, * for us to prefer silence, * for though not 
fraught with danger, O Virgin, * it is difficult to fashion hymns fittingly 
wrought for thee. * Yet, O Mother, grant us the power to chant in such a way, 
* insofar as it is our will.  
O pure Mother, having beheld the indistinct images and dim shadows of the Word 
Who hath newly appeared through the closed gates, but mindful now of His true 
radiance, we bless thy womb as is meet.  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Having attained their desire and been deemed worthy to see the advent of God, 
the people who delight in Christ are now consoled by this, insofar as thou bestowest 
life-bearing grace to those who worship this glory, O pure Virgin.  
Canon of the holy martyr 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Those who rendered worship to stones rather than to the Creator, unable to bear 
thy commitment to God, O glorious one, cut thee asunder with a sword, betrothing 
divine immortality to thee through death.  
The city of Thessalonica boasteth in thy grave-clothes and sufferings, O virgin 
martyr; and the Church of the firstborn and the righteous is gladdened, possessing thy 
divine spirit.  
With faith the magi brought frankincense, gold and myrrh to Him Who was born 
in Bethlehem, and the passion-bearer hath brought the outpouring of the blood of 
her martyrdom, entreating Him on our behalf.  
Theotokion: O all-pure Birthgiver of God, thou hast caused a Rod to bud forth 
from the root of Jesse, having given birth for us today to Christ, the Flower of the 
Godhead, the uncontainable God Who hath now been swaddled as a babe.  
Canon of the venerable one  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Thou didst manifestly hasten up to the summit of utter perfection, O blessed one, 
and attain unto the ranks of the incorporeal ones; and having drawn nigh to thy true 
Desire, thou hast now received a well-spring of good things. Wherefore, we all call 
thee blessed.  
Thou dost rejoice with the choirs of fasters, having labored ascetically; and having 
mortified the passions, thou dost gaze directly upon the beauty of God, which thou 
hadst first acquired through chastity, O all-blessed Melania.  
Having trodden the narrow path, thou didst reach the broad expanse of paradise, 
where the joy of those who keep festival and the tree of life are, be thou ever mindful 
of us who honor thy repose.  
Theotokion: He Who is awesomely borne upon the shoulders of the cherubim 
sitteth now in the arms of the pure Maiden; He is wrapped in swaddling bands, 
loosing the bonds of our evil deeds; and He Who feedeth every creature is fed milk as 
a babe.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Exapostilarion of the feast:  
From on high our Savior, the Dayspring of the East hath visited us and we who 
are in shadowy darkness have truly found Him; for the Lord hath been born from the 
Virgin. (Thrice)  
At. the Aposticha, these Stichera of the feast, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go before us, ye angelic hosts .. ,”: 
Behold, the Lamb of God, * Who as God taketh away the sin of the world, * lieth 
as a babe in a manger, * desiring to deliver the reason-endowed * from all the 
passions of irrationality * and from everlasting retribution. * To Him do we cry out: * 
Blessed art Thou Who hast been born! ** Glory be to Thee, O our God!  
Verse: From the womb before the morning star have I begotten Thee. * The 
Lord hath sworn and will not repent.  
O Thine ineffable mysteries * which pass understanding! * In His compassion 
God is born, on earth, * taking to Himself the image of a servant, * that He might 
rescue * from the slavery of the alien * those who cry to Him with faith: * Blessed art 
Thou Who hast been born! ** Glory be to Thee, our God!  
Verse: The Lord said unto my Lord: * Sit Thou at My right hand.  
Let us stand reverently in the house of the Lord * and together hymn with 
jubilation * His loving-kindness * and His great condescension, * How hath He willed 
to manifest Himself as a babe * in Bethlehem of Judea? * Let us cry aloud: * Blessed 
is He Who hath been born! ** Glory be to Thee, O our God!  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody:  
“O Christ the Sun, how is it that I cover Thee with swaddling bands? * How is it 
that I feed Thee with milk, * Who art the Nourisher of all creation? * How can I hold 
in mine arms * Thee Who holdest all things? * How can I look without fear * at Thee 
upon Whom * the many-eyed cherubim dare not gaze?” ** she who knew not 
wedlock exclaimed, holding Christ.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia, from ODE VIII of both canons of the feast.  
The daughter of Babylon carrieth off the captive children of David from Sion to 
herself; but now she sendeth her own children, the magi bearing gifts, to the God-
pleasing daughter of David, who prayeth. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely throughout all ages!  
The harps refused to play their sad songs, for the children of Sion would not sing 
in a strange land; but Christ, shining forth in Bethlehem, destroyeth all the delusion of 
Babylon and her musical instruments. Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation 
bless the Lord and exalt Him supremely throughout all ages!  
Babylon received the plunder of the kingdom of Sion and its captive riches; but 
Christ draweth its treasures to His Sion, guiding the star-watching kings by a star. 
Wherefore, chanting, let us sing: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him 
supremely throughout all ages!  
Having escaped the destruction resulting from man's being deceived into 
becoming divine, like the youths all creation with trembling unceasingly hymneth the 
Word Who hath abased Himself, and with fear it offereth meager praise, in that it is 
corrupt, even though it hath endured such with wisdom. (Twice)  
Thou comest, O Restoration of the nations, to bring lost human nature back from 
the hills of the wilderness to the pasture rife with flowers; that Thou mightest put 
down the violent power of the slayer of men, having, in Thy forethought, become 
God as well as man.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 
 
In place of “Meet it is” we chant the following  
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Katavasia I: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
 
Communion Verse of the Feast: The Lord hath sent redemption unto His 
people.  
 
