--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 31st  DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 
APODOSIS OF THE NATIVITY OF CHRIST  
THE COMMEMORATION OF THE VENERABLE MELANIA IS TRANSFERRED TO 
DECEMBER 30th, BECAUSE OF THE APODOSIS. 
For the apodosis of the Feast of the Nativity, except for the Litiya, the Readings, 
and the Antiphons, we chant everything as set forth on the Feast of the Nativity. 
From Vespers 6 Stichera from “Lord I have Cried”, repeating the first two, from 
Great Compline the Aposticha with their verses, and from Matins, except for the 
Gospel reading, the Magnification and the Polyeleos, everything as set forth on the 
Feast. The service structure for when the apodosis falls on a weekend can be found in 
the Typicon.  
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, 6 Troparia, from ODE IX of both canons of the feast.  
The magi beheld the excellent course of the strange star which had newly 
appeared, illumining the heavens and marking the birth of Christ the King in 
Bethlehem, for our salvation.  
The star revealed the newborn infant King to the magi who said: “Where is He, 
for we have come to worship Him?” But Herod who fought against God, enraged, 
was troubled, seeking to slay the Christ.  
Herod inquired concerning the time of the star, following whose course the magi 
worshipped Christ with gifts in Bethlehem; but, guided thereby to their homeland, 
they left the cruel murderer of the infants behind in mockery.  
O pure Mother, having beheld the indistinct images and dim shadows of the Word 
Who hath newly appeared through the closed gates, but mindful now of His true 
radiance, we bless thy womb as is meet. (Twice) 
Having attained their desire and been deemed worthy to see the advent of God, 
the people who delight in Christ are now consoled by this, insofar as thou bestowest 
life-bearing grace to those who worship this glory, O pure Virgin.  
Troparion of the feast, in Tone IV:  
Thy Nativity, O Christ our God, * hath shined the light of knowledge upon the 
world; * for thereby, they that worshipped the stars * were instructed by a star * to 
worship Thee, the Sun of Righteousness, * and to know Thee, the Dayspring from on 
high. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Kontakion of the feast, in Tone III:  
Today the Virgin giveth birth to Him Who is transcendent in essence; * and the 
earth offereth a cave to Him Who is unapproachable. * Angels with shepherds give 
glory; * the Magi journey with a star; ** for our sake a young Child is born, Who is 
the pre-eternal God. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
The Prokeimenon, in the VIII Tone: Let all the earth worship Thee and chant 
unto Thee; * let them chant unto Thy name, O Most High. 
Verse: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth; chant ye unto His 
name, give glory in praise of Him. 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (8:7-13) 
Brethren: If the first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been 
sought for the second. For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the 
house of Judah: Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the 
day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because 
they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. For this 
is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the 
Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be 
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people: And they shall not teach every man 
his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know 
me, from the least to the greatest. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and 
their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. In that he saith, A new 
covenant, he hath made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is 
ready to vanish away. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
Verse: Day unto day poureth forth speech, and night unto night proclaimeth 
knowledge. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (8:11-21) 
At that time, the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with Jesus, seeking 
of him a sign from heaven, tempting him. And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and 
saith, Why doth this generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you, There shall no 
sign be given unto this generation. And he left them, and entering into the ship again 
departed to the other side. Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had 
they in the ship with them more than one loaf. And he charged them, saying, Take 
heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. And they 
reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have no bread. And when Jesus 
knew it, he saith unto them, Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? perceive ye 
not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? Having eyes, see ye 
not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember? When I brake the five 
loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They 
say unto him, Twelve. And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets 
full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven. And he said unto them, How is it 
that ye do not understand? 

--- PAGE 3 ---
In place of “Meet it is” we chant the following: 
 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, the most pure Virgin Theotokos, who is more 
honorable and more glorious than the armies on high!  
Katavasia: A strange and most wondrous mystery do I see: * the cave is 
heaven; * the Virgin the throne of the cherubim; * the manger a room, in 
which Christ God, * whom nothing can contain, is laid. * Whom we praise and 
magnify. 
 
Communion Verse of the Feast: The Lord hath sent redemption unto His 
people.  
 
