--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GENERAL VIGIL SERVICE TO AN APOSTLE. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “What shall we name thee ...”:  
O Apostle what shall we name thee?, * heaven, since thou hast confessed the 
glory of God ? * a stream, since thou dost mystically give drink unto creation? * a 
star, that illumines the Church? * a cup which pours forth holy nector? * or true 
friend of Christ and companion of the Bodiless Powers? * We entreat thee, do thou 
make supplication that our souls be saved.  
O glorious God-seeing Apostle! * Beautiful have become thy feet treading well 
along the paths of preaching * and making narrow the way of the enemy by the 
breadth of thy divine knowledge of the Word * who hath appeared in the coarseness 
of the flesh * and who O radiant one hath selected thee as a most glorious disciple. * 
Do thou make supplication unto Him that our souls may be saved.  
O Godly-spoken Apostle, * thou wast truly sent from Christ * as a luminous 
arrow wounding our enemies * and manifestly granting unto wounded souls cures; * 
wherefore we dutifully, * glorify thee and celebrate today thy holy feast. * Do thou 
ever intercede that our souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
To the Theotokos we the sinful and lowly ones, * do we now earnestly hasten; * 
and we fall down in repentance, * crying out from the depths of our soul: * O 
Sovereign Lady, have compassionate pity and mercy upon us! * Hasten thou, for we 
are perishing * from the multitude of our transgressions! * Turn not thy servants 
empty away, ** for thee do we have as our only hope! 
The Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon 
the Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to 
Thee: * “O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of 
the Cross? * How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O 
long-suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
If an Idiomelon be appointed, Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Divine grace was poured out through thy lips, * O glorious Apostle (name), * and 
thou wast shown to be a lamp of the Church of Christ, * teaching the spiritual sheep 
* to believe in the Consubstantial Trinity, * and in the One Divinity.  
 If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, sing 
the following Dogmatic in Tone VI (If the service is a Resurrection service 
sing the Dogmatic of the Tone for that service ): 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and all-blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Otherwise, Theotokion: No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin 
Theotokos, * departeth from thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** 
ever receiveth a gift for their profitable petition.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth birth 
unto Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son How is 
it that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?” 
The Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons. 
THE 1ST GENERAL EPISTLE OF JOHN (3:21 - 4:6) 
Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, (then) have we confidence toward God. 
And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and 
do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And this is his commandment, That we 
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave 
us commandment. And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he 
in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given 
us. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: 
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit 
of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 
And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of 
God: and this is that (spirit) of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; 
and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have 
overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They 
are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We 
are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. 
THE 1ST GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN, (4, 11-16) 
Beloved: if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath 
seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is 
perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath 
given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son 
(to be) the Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, 
God dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that 
God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God 
in him. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE 1ST GENERAL EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN, (4, 20-21 ; 5, 1-5) 
 Beloved: If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that 
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not 
seen? And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his 
brother also. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every 
one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him. By this we 
know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his 
commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and 
his commandments are not grievous. For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the 
world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, (even) our faith. Who is he 
that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
O Apostle, having obtained * an invincible authority over demons, * and power in 
the name of Christ * drive thou away the princes of darkness. * Like a sun thou hast 
passed through the regions of the earth * shining forth enlightenment, * and, O 
glorious one, instructing all the lands, * preaching Christ’s first and saving coming.  
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth * and their words unto 
the ends of the world.  
Resembling the first grace * and the most essential and divine life, * thou hast 
shown thyself (name) to be a good man in deed, * and named a son of divine grace. * 
for on account of the goodness of thy disposition and the purity of thy mind * thou 
hast appeared unto all to be a sincere disciple of Christ. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
O Apostle (name), * through divine inspiration, * and like a well fashioned 
instrument, * thou hast devoted thyself to the conversion of the Gentiles, * 
instructing them by word and deed, * in the knowledge of Christ, * enlightening all to 
confess * the true Divinity of Jesus, the Savior of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Leaving earthly cares O Apostle (name), * and having followed Christ, sealed with 
the breath of the Holy Spirit, * thou wast sent by Him unto the lost nations * to turn 
mankind unto the light of the knowledge of God, * thereupon, having ended the 
exploits of thy divine passion * and the suffering of multifarious tortures, * thou didst 
give thy soul unto Christ; * we beseech thee O all-blessed one to entreat Him, * that 
He grant unto us great mercy.  
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
 If the celebration be with a Polyeleos, chant the Resurrection Theotokion: 
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever known a 
mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her arm Him 
Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * O most pure 
one, who carried Him as an infant in Thine embrace * and before Whom thou hast a 
mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those who honor thee, ** that He 
have compassion and save our souls. 
Otherwise, Theotokion: Like a fruitful olive tree, * the Virgin brought Thee forth 
as the Fruit of life, * bearing unto the world, ** the fruit of rich and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Tree of the Cross. O Jesus, she 
that kneweth not wedlock said weeping: “O sweet Child, why hast Thou abandoned 
me who alone gave birth to Thee, O unapproachable Light of the beginningless 
Father? Hasten Thou, and glorify Thyself, that those who glorify Thy divine 
sufferings may receive divine glory!” 
 The Troparion from the Typicon. If there be no Typicon, chant the following:  
Troparion, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle (name), * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
 On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle (name), * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins ** unto our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Having netted the nations, * the glorious Apostle (name) taught the ends of the 
earth * to adore Thee O Christ God, * together with the Father and the Holy Spirit; * 
for which sake do Thou establish Thy Church * and send down unto the faithful Thy 
blessings, ** O Only-merciful One and Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
Through thee, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, * we have become partakers of the 
divine nature; * for thou hast given birth to God incarnate for our sake. ** 
Wherefore, as is meet we all reverently magnify thee.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Christ the Sun of righteousness * hath emitted thee, O glorious Apostle (name), * 
as a bright ray illumining all the earth, * and thou dost illumine with thine 
intercessions and enlightenest with the never-waning Light, ** all those who with 
faith celebrate thy holy memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
Thou unashamed hope, * of those who put their trust in thee * thou who alone 
hath supra-naturally, * brought forth Christ our God in the flesh, * with the holy 
apostles, do thou entreat Him before the end, * to grant unto all, the remission of 
transgressions ** and the restoration of our lives. 
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify thee, O holy Apostle of 
Christ (name), and honor thy sufferings and pangs with which thou hast 
labored in the preaching of the Gospel of Christ.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands. 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the wisdom ...”: 
With a net of divine words * thou hast caught the spiritual fish, * bearing them 
unto our God as first-fruits, * and, in thy desire to adorn thyself in the wounds of 
Christ, * thou didst emulate Him in His passion. * Wherefore, O glorious Apostle, * 

--- PAGE 6 ---
gathered together today we honor thine all-festive memory as is meet, * and with one 
voice cry unto thee: * Make entreaty unto Christ our God * that He grant remission 
of sins unto those who honor thy holy memory with love. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Let us hymn the heavenly gate and ark, * the most holy mountain, the cloud of 
light, the heavenly ladder, * the spiritual Paradise, the redemption of Eve, * the great 
treasure of the world; * because salvation for the world and forgiveness of ancient 
offences were wrought in her. * Therefore we cry unto her: * Intercede with thine 
own Son and God to grant forgiveness of offences ** to those who devoutly worship 
thine all-holy Offspring. 
If of Polyeleos rank, and not a Resurrection Service, chant the following:  
The Song of Ascents: The first antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth * and their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands. 
Let every breath ...,  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (9, 36-38; 10, 1. 5-8) 
At that time Jesus: saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, 
because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. Then 
saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few; 
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his 
harvest. And when he had called unto (him) his twelve disciples, he gave them power 
against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all 
manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go 
not into the way of the Gentiles, and into (any) city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 
But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying, 
The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 After the 50th Psalm: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Holy Apostle (name), * O Merciful One, ** blot out 
the multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
In Tone VI: 
Clearly receiving the grace of the Divine Spirit, * thou, O (name), wast numbered 
with the sacred choir of the Apostles; * wherefore thou also hast received the fiery 
breath that once descended from heaven * in the form of tongues of fire, * with 
which thou didst burn up the thorny godlessness of the gentiles. * Do thou, O 
preacher, entreat Christ God ** that our souls may be saved. 
The Canon, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Refrain: Holy Apostle (name) pray to God for us 
Standing on high before the Master Who hath glorified thee, O wondrous 
Apostle (name), and hath manifestly shown thee to be His disciple, I beseech thee to 
enlighten my soul that I may hymn thy divine memory. 
Christ, righteous in His judgment, hath granted unto thee an abundance of good 
things, and as the pinnacle of divine gifts hath shown thee to be a God-inspired 
Apostle, being Himself the Only-righteous One.  
Having received the spiritual light that came down from heaven upon thee, O 
Apostle, thou wast inspired by the Holy fire, burning the deceit of polytheism.  
Theotokion: My mortal and corrupt nature hast Thou, O Savior, shown to be 
immortal and incorrupt. For having dwelt in the womb of the holy most pure Virgin, 
who knew not wedlock, Thou didst take upon thyself the nature of mankind.  
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as our God, 
* Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The divine mystery of the incarnation hast thou, O Godly-acceptable Apostle, 
truly learned, having received from the Savior Himself illumination from above.  
The Word Beginningless and Eternal hath abundantly illumined thee His minister 
with the lustrous brightness of divine grace, O wondrous Apostle (name).  
Ablaze with the spiritual dawning, thou, O most glorious Apostle, proceeded 
forth as a God-inspired radiance sent from Christ. Wherefore, O radiant one, thou 
hast enlightened the world with thy teaching.  
Theotokion: The Prophet foretold of thee, as one likened to a golden candlestick 
carrying the never-waning Light, Christ our God, Who enlighteneth the world with 
the rays of His divinity.  
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine ...”:  
With the illumination of the Divine Spirit * thou didst disperse the darkness of 
polytheism * and enlightened the hearts of the faithful, * loudly proclaiming, O most 
wise Apostle (name), the saving commandments, * entreat Christ God to grant us 
great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Whither doth each one who is saved, * rightly have recourse; * and to what other 
such refuge can there be * which doth protect our souls like thee, ** O Theotokos?  
Stavrotheotokion: Having obtained the Cross of thy Son as a staff of strength, * 
O Theotokos, * therewith we cast down the arrogance of the enemy, ** and with love 
unceasingly magnify thee.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Being the treasury of all the gifts of the gospel, thou, O most radiant (name), was 
found to be full of grace, the light of the world and the salt of the universe. 
O wondrous one, turning away from shameful things, thou wast found worthy to 
behold the immaterial light of the Divinity, Who assumed the form of a man.  
As a disciple of the incorruptible Life, do thou, with the life-creating power of the 
Life-giver, Whose energy thou hast received, slay thou the sin that doth live within us.  
Theotokion: Being equal with Thy Father in essence, Thou didst become equal 
unto man in nature, having taken, O Master, our flesh from the most pure Virgin.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou hast enlightened * with the knowledge of God * the ends of the 
universe * that lay in the night of ignorance, * do Thou also, O Lord, illumine 
me * with the dawning of Thy love for mankind. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thy tongue, O God-seer, became mingled with the spiritual fire which thou didst 
lovingly receive sitting in the upper chamber.  
Living on high as one dwelling in the uppermost abodes, thou, O Apostle (name), 
hast brought unto us lofty and noble teachings.  
Having thy pure mind turned towards God in quietitude, thou didst acquire a 
pure heart and behold in the flesh, God, Who is incomprehensible for the intellect.  
Theotokion: With thy childbirth, O Virgin, the first law hath ceased, grace hath 
blossomed, and truth hath shone forth.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
O glorious Apostle, as a disciple and friend of Christ thou hast zealously worked 
for the Lord God Almighty.  
The Savior hath shown thee to be a selfless worker of divine wonders, having 
given thee power through the operation of His grace.  
O all-famed Apostle of Christ (name), adorned with the divine grace of teaching, 
thou didst announce unto all the world the universal salvation of God Who is Lord 
over all.  
Theotokion: Let the mouths of the wicked be shut, and let their faces be clothed 
with shame, for they do not count thee, O all-immaculate one; to be the Theotokos.  
 The Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
As a most bright star illumining all * with a multitude of thy miracles, * the 
Church hath for ever acquired thee, * O Apostle (name), * wherefore we cry aloud 
unto Christ: * Save, O Greatly-merciful One, * those who with faith honor the 
memory of Thine Apostle.  
The Ikos: O Lord grant unto me a stream of speech, O thou Who didst create the 
nature of water, and strengthen my heart, O Compassionate One, for Thou hast 
established the universe by Thy Word, wherefore enlighten my thoughts, O Thou 
who puttest on light as a garment, and grant that I may speak and hymn in a manner 
worthy of the veneration of Thine Apostle, O Greatly-merciful One.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the flames, 
* changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * “Blessed art Thou, O Lord 
our God, throughout the ages.”  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Possessing wonderful zeal, thou, O (name), now standing before the throne of 
the Master crowned as a servant of Christ and teacher of the law of God, dost 
proclaim: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages.  
Exulting together with the Word and having been His companion, thou wast 
made a co-partaker of the Kingdom of the Most High, and dost proclaim: Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages.  
Full of wisdom, and enlightened by grace, adorned with serene beauty, thou, O 
Divinely speaking holy Apostle, dost proclaim: Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, 
throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Through the false promise of a better life, the serpent of old drove 
the fore-parents from paradise, and thou, O Mother of God, hast recalled them; 
blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, refusing 
to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all ages. 
As thy feet appeared beautiful, so also was thy speech comely, which proclaimed 
the glory of Christ and taught us all to call to Him: “Hymn the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages.”  
Adorned with brilliant-rayed virtues and emitting the light of a multitude of 
miracles, thou didst become known unto the people as a blessed seed impelling us to 
call out: “Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.”  
A holy disciple, well versed in the heavenly mysteries, thou O Apostle, hast 
passed throughout the universe, teaching openly the word of faith in Christ, and 
confessing the ineffable grace, whilst exclaiming: “Hymn the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages.”  
Theotokion: The mind cannot fathom thy child-bearing, O Birthgiver of God, 
being feeble and incapable of expressing it in words; for having conceived, O Virgin, 
thou didst give birth unto the very God, Whom we exalt unto all the ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
Thou hast been revealed to the ends of the world, O Apostle, shining with the 
divine light. For receiving the spiritual fire, thou hast appeared, O Apostle (name), 
resplendent with light, wherefore we magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Giving thyself up entirely unto God, O Divinely revealed one, thou didst become 
thoroughly mingled with Him. Do thou now entreat Him on behalf of us who with 
faith and love praise thee.  
Celebrating thy memory, O most radiant one, we entreat thee that by thy bold 
intercession, which thou dost possess as an Apostle of Christ, we be freed from all 
tribulations, O all-honorable God-seer.  
Theotokion: We magnify in hymns the intercessor and salvation of all mankind, 
who hast appeared, and illumined the world with the radiance of her godly purity.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Foreseeing by the Spirit ...”:  
The hastening of thy beautiful feet O apostle (name) hath brought thee to the 
kingdom of heaven, and entering therein rejoicing, thou standest now before the 
Holy Trinity beholding the Son and the Divine Spirit in the Father, wherefore with 
faith we commemorate thy most sacred and divine memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Having recalled to myself * the hour of the dreadful trial * I am horrified and 
frightened * by the multitude of my wicked deeds; * but take compassion on me, O 
most pure one, * and in thy warm supplications grant unto me salvation; ** for 
whatsoever thou dost will thou can do. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Him Who was born of thee * hanging upon 
the Tree, O most immaculate one, * thou didst exclaim, crying aloud: * “O my Child 
most desired, * whither hath the luminous beauty of Thee faded, ** Thou Who hast 
adorned the human race?”  
On the Praises, the Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
With the staff of grace O wondrous one, * thou hast snatched men from the 
abyss of their vanities, * and having thyself obeyed, O (name), * the beckoning of thy 
Teacher, * Who hath in everything * enlightened thine understanding, * thou hast 
been shown, O most radiant one, * to be an Apostle and honorable herald ** of the 
incomprehensible Divinity of God. (Twice) 
O radiant one, * the enlightenment of the Spirit came down upon thee * in the 
form of fire making thee a divine receptacle, * swiftly driving away the mist of 
godlessness * and enlightening the world * with the splendor of thy most wise speech, 
* O expounder of mysteries, * ornament of the Apostles, ** and eyewitness of Christ.  
O glorious one, * with the brilliant flashes of thy preaching * thou hast shown, 
that for the sake of their faith, * those who sat in the darkness of ignorance * have 
became sons of the Master and God. * For His passion and death hast thou emulated 
* becoming an heir of His glory, * as one wise and Godly-spoken, ** and as a disciple 
of truth.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
O Apostle (name); * having given up earthly things * thou hast followed Christ, 
and been sealed with the breath of the Holy Spirit, * and sent by Him unto the lost 
nations * to turn men unto the light of the knowledge of God. * Having thereupon 
ended the exploits of thy divine passion * and of various torments, thou didst give up 
to Christ thy soul; * do thou ever supplicate Him, * O most blessed one, * to grant 
unto us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
All my hope I place in thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy protection.  
Stavrotheotokion: When the undefiled lamb saw her offspring * as a man 
willingly dragged to the slaughter, * with weeping she spake saying; * “Dost Thou 
now, O Christ my God, strive to make childless * the one who gave birth unto Thee? 
* Wherefore hast Thou done this to me, * O Redeemer of all? * Nevertheless, I hymn 
and glorify Thine extreme goodness * O Lover of mankind * which transcends mind 
and speech.” 
The great Doxology: If a small Doxology is read, and a Doxasticon is 
appointed, the following is chanted after the Aposticha: 
 Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Leaving earthly cares O Apostle (name), * and having followed Christ, sealed with 
the breath of the Holy Spirit, * thou wast sent by Him unto the lost nations * to turn 
mankind unto the light of the knowledge of God, * thereupon, having ended the 
exploits of thy divine passion * and the suffering of multifarious tortures, * thou didst 
give thy soul unto Christ; * we beseech thee O all-blessed one to entreat Him, * that 
He grant unto us great mercy.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After Our Father .., Troparion of the Apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle (name), * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
The divine mystery of the incarnation hast thou, O Godly-acceptable Apostle, 
truly learned, having received from the Savior Himself illumination from above. 
(Twice) 
The Word Beginningless and Eternal hath abundantly illumined thee His minister 
with the lustrous brightness of divine grace, O wondrous Apostle (name).  
Ablaze with the spiritual dawning, thou, O most glorious Apostle, proceeded 
forth as a God-inspired radiance sent from Christ. Wherefore, O radiant one, thou 
hast enlightened the world with thy teaching.  
O glorious Apostle, as a disciple and friend of Christ thou hast zealously worked 
for the Lord God Almighty.  
The Savior hath shown thee to be a selfless worker of divine wonders, having 
given thee power through the operation of His grace.  
O all-famed Apostle of Christ (name), adorned with the divine grace of teaching, 
thou didst announce unto all the world the universal salvation of God Who is Lord 
over all.  
Theotokion: Let the mouths of the wicked be shut, and let their faces be clothed 
with shame, for they do not count thee, O all-immaculate one; to be the Theotokos.  
The Troparion and Kontakion appointed by the Typicon. If there be none, 
chant the following:  
Troparion of the Apostle, in Tone III: 
O holy Apostle (name), * entreat the Merciful God * that He grant remission of 
sins * unto our souls. 
Kontakion of the Apostle, in Tone IV:  
As a most bright star illumining all * with a multitude of thy miracles, * the 
Church hath for ever acquired thee, * O Apostle (name), * wherefore we cry aloud 
unto Christ: * Save, O Greatly-merciful One, * those who with faith honor the 
memory of Thine Apostle.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
The Prokeimenon: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth * and their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaimeth 
the work of His hands. 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THE 1st EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS (1 COR. 4:9-16) 
 Brethren: I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were 
appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to 
men. We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are 
strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this present hour we both 
hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace; 
And labor, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we 
suffer it: Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, (and are) 
the offscoring of all things unto this day. I write not these things to shame you, but as 
my beloved sons I warn (you). For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, 
yet (have ye) not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the 
gospel. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess thy wonders, O Lord, thy truth 
in the Church of the saints. 
Verse: God, Who is glorified in the council of the saints.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (9:36-38, 10:1-8) 
 At that time: Jesus saw the multitudes, and was moved with compassion on 
them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. 
Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are 
few; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his 
harvest. And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power 
against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all 
manner of disease. Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon, 
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his 
brother; Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James the son 
of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus; Simon the Canaanite, 
and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and 
commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of 
the Samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 
And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, 
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give. 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth * and their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
