--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GENERAL VIGIL SERVICE TO THE FOOLISH 
FOR CHRIST’S SAKE  
ANDREW OF CONSTANTINOPLE, ISIDORE OF ROSTOV, MAXIM AND BASIL OF 
MOSCOW, XENIA OF ST. PETERSBURG, & OTHERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
 O Divinely-wise blessed (name), * Thy pure soul shining with an Orthodox 
understanding, * resplendent with the radiance of virtues, * illumineth the hearts of 
the faithful, * driving away the darkness * of the demons; * wherefore as a participant 
of uncreated grace * we all reverently praise thee, ** O wonder-worthy one.  
 With a compassionate soul, * pure thoughts, and a valiant heart, * undoubting 
faith, and truly impartial love * thou hast departed from earth to heaven * and made 
thy habitation * with the choirs of the righteous; * wherefore we all honor thee with 
sacred hymns, * reverently glorifying thee, ** O wonder-worthy (name).  
 Strengthened by divine teaching, * thou hast driven away the passions of the 
body * and showed thyself to be a spotless habitation * of the Holy Trinity; * for 
which thou hast departed unto a life divine, * and thy sanctified body is now 
preserved incorrupt by God, * Who in His divine judgment, * as He Himself 
knoweth, ** revealed and glorified thee, O (name).  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
 How can we not help but wonder at thy life? * or how can we abstain from 
praising thee, O holy (name), * for thine angelic life, the chastity of thy thoughts, * 
thy humble and silent meekness, * and thine inexhaustible charity? * for thou wast 
adorned with all the virtues, O blessed one; * wherefore the heavenly Kingdom and 
ineffable joy awaiteth thee.  
 If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, sing 
the following Dogmatic in Tone I (If the service is a Resurrection service sing 
the Dogmatic of the Tone for that service ): 
Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and who 
gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn of the 
Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been revealed as the 
Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle wall, she hath 
brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore, holding fast to 
her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion the Lord born 
from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of God; ** for as the 
Invincible one he shall conquer our adversaries. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Otherwise, Theotokion: Accepting the entreaty of us * who have recourse to 
thy protection, O most holy Virgin, * cease thou never to make supplication to 
Him * Who is the Lover of mankind, ** that He save thy servants.  
Stavrotheotokion: Of old, when thou didst behold thy Son and Master stretching 
forth His hands upon the Cross, His side pierced by the spear, О pure Mother, thou 
didst cry out, lamenting: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou sufferest, ridding men of 
their suffering, О Lover of mankind?” 
The Entrance. The Prokeimenon of the day. The Three Lessons, if appointed. 
THE READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3, 1-9). 
 The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect. 
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, aye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair un to men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”:  
A temple and abode of the Most Holy Spirit * wast thou, O most wise (name); * 
wherefore also make us who honor * thy holy memory ** temples of the same Spirit.  
Verse The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, * and shall hope in Him.  
Thy life like the sun shineth forth * in the hearts of the faithful, * emitting 
miracles; * wherefore illumine with the never-fading light ** us also who honor thine 
all-honorable memory.  
Verse The righteous man shall flourish like a palm-tree; * like a cedar in 
Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
 Cease not to pray on behalf of us thy servants, * so near unto thee, * since thou 
O (name), hast enlightened us with thy spiritual life, * that we all may joyfully honor 
** thy honorable memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
 Thou hast appeared, O most blessed (name), * as an earthly Angel and a 
heavenly citizen, * a fountain of compassion, a current of mercy, * an abyss of 
wonders, a stream of healings, * a divine olive-tree truly fruitful, * with the oil of thy 
labors enlightening those who faithfully honor thee, * O truly wonder-worthy one, * 
entreat the Lover of mankind to deliver from afflictions ** those who lovingly 
celebrate thine all-honorable memory.  
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
 If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, chant the Resurrection Theotokion: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 

--- PAGE 4 ---
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
Otherwise, Theotokion: Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * 
thou who hast given birth to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O thou who alone art the intercessor for our souls!  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee suspended upon the Cross, O Word of 
God, Thy most pure Mother exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, hast tasted death, 
desiring to bring life to mortals, in so far as Thou art compassionate?” 
The Troparion, in Tone I: 
Having heard the voice of the Apostle Paul, exclaiming: * We are foolish for 
Christ’s sake, * Thy servant (name), O Christ God, * loved the life of the foolish for 
Thy sake on earth. * Wherefore venerating his (her) memory ** we entreat Thee, O 
Lord, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
 On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion in Tone I:  
Having heard the voice of the Apostle Paul, exclaiming: * We are foolish for 
Christ’s sake, * Thy servant (name), O Christ God, * loved the life of the foolish for 
Thy sake on earth. * Wherefore venerating his (her) memory * we entreat Thee, O 
Lord, that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The Co-beginningless Word ...”:  
Let us honor with hymns the God-bearing (name), * as a firm and immovable 
pillar against the assaults of the enemy; * for by his (her) endurance He (She) hath 
truly put to shame and set to flight the opposing enemy, * and doth now make 
supplication for the salvation of our souls. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V: 
Awesome is the miracle of thy conceiving, and the ineffable image of birth giving 
known in thee, O pure Ever-virgin, filleth my mind with awe and amazeth my 
thoughts. Thy glory hath spread over all, O Theotokos, unto the salvation of our 
souls.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
By fasting and abstinence * and lying on the bare ground * thou hast withered the 
passions of the flesh, * but enlightened the soul, * and in heaven thou hast received 
from Christ a great reward; * wherefore, having pleased God, * even after thy passing 
* thou hast appeared as a worthy vessel of miracles * for those who have recourse 
unto the shrine of thy relics, O most blessed (name). * Entreat Christ God to grant 
forgiveness of sins * to those who with love venerate thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
With thy divine birth O pure one, * thou hast renewed the nature of those born 
on earth, * mortal and corrupted by passions, * and having raised all from death unto 
a life of incorruption; * we all dutifully bless thee, O exceedingly glorious Virgin, ** as 
thou didst foretell. 
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We bless thee, O holy and righteous 
(name), and honor thy holy memory, for thou dost pray for us unto Christ our 
God.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Thou hast appeared wonderful in thine endurance, * pleasing unto Christ in every 
way; * O most blessed (name), * for strengthened in soul by thy wise contemplations, 
* and having subjugated the flesh to the spirit, * thou didst choose to practice the 
labor of virtue wholly for the sake God, * manfully declaring: * The winter may be 
severe, but paradise is sweet; * the work is painful, but blessed are the spiritual 
meadows. * Wherefore, O most blessed one, entreat Christ God that our souls be 
saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
We magnify thee, O Theotokos, * proclaiming thee to be * the only blessed one, 
** for from thee Christ God hath ineffably been born. 
If of Polyeleos rank, and not a Resurrection Service, chant the following:  
The Song of Ascents: The first antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
The Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord, * and shall 
hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto 
Thee.  
Let every breath ...,  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (11, 27-30) 
 All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but 
the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever 
the Son will reveal him. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly 
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is 
light. 
 After the 50th Psalm: 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of blessed (name), * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ...,  
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Then the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
 O man (maiden) of God, * wonderful (name)! * Having ascended the ladder of 
virtues, * thou also ascended unto Jerusalem on high * and there dost thou behold 
Christ, the Desired One. * For His sake thou didst emaciate thy body * and 
exchanged the corruptible for immortal life. * Do thou Supplicate Him unceasingly 
for us ** that our souls may be granted peace and great mercy.  
The Canon, in Tone IV:  
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, * 
and by Moses” outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the power 
of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
Refrain: Holy blessed (name) pray to God for us 
Through participation in the light that is God, thou, O blessed (name), became 
light, and departing unto Him, O Father (Mother), and as a consequence of thy 
profound desire, thou hast attained the realization of thy blessed hope.  
Inflamed by desire for God, thou didst forsake the world and, having met on the 
way Christ, thy fellow-traveler, thou O glorious Father (Mother) (name), hast joyfully 
walked with Him along the saving path.  
Not desiring to become wealthy in exhaustible riches, thou hast virtuously and 
wisely rejected transient wealth and glory, temporary food and worldly possessions.  
Theotokion: Having learned thee to be a fair, select and all-honored, the Son of 
God became thy Son, O most immaculate one, and by grace hath made sons those, O 
Theotokos , who honor thee.  
ODE III 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O Lord, 
art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
With zeal hast thou stripped thyself of all for the sake of spiritual deeds and thus 
vanquished, with the help of the Divine Spirit, the armies of the enemy.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
With wounds, prayerful abstinence and bows hast thou, O holy Father (Mother) 
(name), painfully subdued the worldly passions.  
Having joyfully desired Thy life-giving death, O Master, Thy Blessed, (name), O 
Jesus, hath starved to death the enemy.  
Theotokion: Thou O most pure and all-immaculate one, hast given birth Unto 
Him who hath delivered mankind from the ancient curse, the fruit of disobedience, 
unto the cause of all that is.  
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The Co-beginningless Word ...”:  
Illumined by divine peace, * thou didst unerringly traverse the paths * leading to 
the splendor of the divine effulgence, * and, having evaded the attacks of the enemy, 
* hast been revealed to be a son (daughter) of the light and of the day, * O godly 
blessed, holy Father (Mother) (name).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V: 
O most pure Theotokos, * city of Christ God! * deliver from dangers * thy people 
who call upon thee, * and repulse the attacks of the prideful noetic enemies, * that we 
may cry unto thee: * Rejoice, O blessed one! 
Stavrotheotokion: Through the Cross of thy Son, * O thou who art full of the 
grace of God, * hath the deception of idolatry been utterly vanquished, * and the 
might of the demons hath fallen; * wherefore, we, the faithful, ever hymn and bless 
thee as is meet, ** confessing thee to be the true Theotokos.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  
O holy (name), traversing the paths of righteousness, and entering the God-
preserved divine city thou art now enriched with salvific effulgence.  
Comprehending a consistent, God-bearing meaning in all of the divine narratives, 
thou, O holy (name), hast vested thyself in them as if in a divine garment.  
The grace of the Holy Spirit found thy heart, O holy Father (Mother) (name), to 
be an altogether unwritten tablet, upon which it hath inscribed perfect humility, faith 
and unfeigned love.  
Theotokion: He that sitteth upon the most exalted cherubic throne, our 
supremely glorified God, hath made thee, O Mary Bride of God, His throne, and 
rested in thine arms.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy light 
turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises in faith. 
Having perceived the most resplendent light, thou, O right glorious (name), hath 
appeared like a sun vanquishing the demonic darkness.  
Through his (her) desire for Thee, O Christ, the all-venerable (name) hath 
rejected the desires of the body, having cast them off as worldly refuse.  
Having strengthened thy soul by divine power, thou didst make thine abode in 
the world as a homeless wanderer in order to free thyself of the passions, O Divinely-
wise Father (Mother) (name).  
Theotokion: The cares of things corruptible hath ceased, for the Virgin hath 
incorruptibly and supra-naturally given birth, beyond all telling, unto God the Word, 
and yet remaineth a Virgin.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * “I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise” * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons” * 
by the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Directing thy mind entirely towards God in unceasing study, thou, O (name), 
mercilessly rejected the temptations of carnal love and the acquisition of earthly 
goods.  
O blessed one, whilst living in the midst of the world, thou didst not permit any 
defilement, nor spot to defile thee, but rather by thy venerable supplications, thou 
dost cleanse the defilement of the souls of those who have recourse unto thee.  
 Harboring thoughts above the subtlety of the flesh, thou wast not affected, when 
bared in the midst of women (men), for thou O (name), hadst clothed thyself in the 
vesture of dispassion.  
Theotokion: With our lips, thoughts and hearts we praise thee, O most holy 
Theotokos, for through thee we who were once rejected through the transgression of 
our fore-parents, have now been reconciled with God.  
 The Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion of the Venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Desiring heavenly beauty, * thou O blessed (name), didst discard the ignoble 
carnal delights of the body, * and leading a life like that of the Angels * utterly void of 
desire for things of this vain world * thou didst repose; * wherefore we beseech thee 
that together with the Angels * ye may ever intercede before Christ our God ** on 
behalf of us all.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Ikos: How can I a sinner, defiled in both body and soul, describe the Angelic 
life lived by thee while in the flesh, and the multitude of thy most glorious miracles? 
When even the multitude of the wise are unable to succeed in describing thy humility 
and fervent love for Christ, and thy great endurance, yet trusting in thy meekness, O 
blessed one, I presume to cry unto thee exclaiming: Rejoice, O most brilliant star, 
shining forth from the East of virtues and illumining the universe with thy miracles! 
Rejoice, thou who disdained thy parents” love, but loved with all thy heart Christ 
alone, Who is the God of all, and followed Him with an irrevocable desire! Rejoice, 
thou who didst choose, in accordance with the words of the Apostle, a turbulent and 
foolish life! Rejoice, thou who hast transfigured things corruptible and wavering, by 
the hope of future reward. Rejoice, thou who in thine endurance wast like unto 
ancient Job! Rejoice, O great sufferer of Christ, invincible, ever vanquishing the devil 
with thy humility! Rejoice, thou who, like unto that ancient beggar Lazarus, now rests 
in the bosom of Abraham! Rejoice, thou who, after thy departure from this world, art 
an ever ready intercessor and protector for all those who are in the midst of dangers 
and temptations! Rejoice, O quick protector of those that invoke thee! Rejoice, O 
Divinely-wise (name)!  
ODE VII 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Inspired by a godly Christ-like desire to save others, thou O Father (Mother) 
(name), didst joyfully and entirely give thyself up to Him, exclaiming: “Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy Glory, O Lord.”  
Having received divine food from heaven, thou, O blessed Father (Mother) 
(name), dost feed those who graciously accept thine admonitions, and abandon 
destructive sin.  
Following the traditions of the Holy Fathers, thou, O wise (name), hast 
commanded all to shun the wicked and destructive teachings of falsehood, wherefore 
we cry out: “Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord.”  
Theotokion: Rejoice O Theotokos, the sacred divine tabernacle of the Most High, 
for through thee joy hath been granted unto those, who cry aloud: “Blessed art thou 
among women, O all-immaculate Lady.”  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their den; * 
while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched the power 
of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
O Most brilliant star, bringing life unto those mired in the swamp of passions, 
thou didst persuade defiled women to lead a chaste life, vanquishing all their 
infirmities, wherefore they exclaimed: “Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.”  
Being competent in mind, O holy (name), thou hast captured a multitude in the 
net of thy wise wonders, inspiring them to a life of foolishness for Christ’s sake, 
knowing full well they may be abused by the wicked, wherefore in thy pure soul thou 
dost exclaim: “Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.”  
The Lord alone is perfect, and it is He that glorifieth His own according to their 
worthiness. For when thou wast carried unto thy grave, O blessed one, He honored 
thee with heavenly hymns, wherefore thou dost exclaim: “Bless ye the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord.”  
Theotokion: He that delivereth us, even the Lord, hath shone forth from thee, O 
pure Virgin, do thou entreat O Lady, that those who hymn thee may be enlightened, 
and delivered from all attacks we may cry aloud: “Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord.”  
ODE IX 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
With all thy heart thou didst offer thyself unto the Trinity, and was thereby found 
worthy of receiving the divine illumining rays of the Spirit, by which thou wast made 
resplendent O (name), rejoicing together with the Angels.  
Having united thyself unto God through a right-ordered desire, and being 
enlightened by abstinence, thou, O God-blessed (name), hast already participated in 
the sweetness of future blessings.  
Through thy labors and thy sweat thou hast attained unto the joy that hath no 
end; delighting therein, O most blessed (name), do thou also remember us.  
Theotokion: O holy Lady who hast given birth to the Redeemer and Benefactor 
of all, save me and vanquish from my soul the dark clouds of the passions which ever 
war with me, O cloud of divine Light, and do thou ever strengthen me.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
In thy wanderings thou didst not wander far * from those near to thee in this 
world, * and in thy spotless life thou didst please Christ the God of all; * unto Him 
do we thy servants now beseech thee O Divinely-wise (name), * to make entreaty on 
behalf of those ** who in faith celebrate thine all-honored memory.  
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
Do thou, O Virgin, * who hast given birth to the Hypostatic Wisdom, * the pre-
eternal Word * and Physician of all, * heal the bitter and longstanding scars and 
wounds of my soul, ** and assuage the passionate impulses of my heart. 
On the Praises, the Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
O supremely good Lord, * Thou hast given us a parable of endurance and 
courage * in Thy righteous servant (name), * who hath shone forth with many 
miracles, virtues, words and deeds, * adorned with chastity and meekness; * 
wherefore we glorify Thine ineffable dispensation, * O Jesus all-powerful, * the 
Savior of our souls. (Twice)  
Righteous and meek, * truthful, unblemished and faithful, * eschewing every evil 
thing, * illumined with virtues and shining forth in piety, * hast thou been revealed to 
be, O blessed (name); * wherefore we praise thee * and today joyfully celebrate thy 
holy and honorable repose (glorification), * O Divinely-wise one.  
Having clothed thyself in chastity and a right faith, * as in a most precious purple 
robe, * and having been crowned with truth and meekness as with a divine crown, * 
thou, O (name), didst desire to reign with the sufferers for Christ’s sake, * and now 
thou standest before the King of Hosts, * even Jesus, the all-merciful Savior of our 
souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The unveiling of thy virtues, * O Divinely-wise one, * hath illumined the hearts of 
the faithful. * For who cannot but wonder at hearing of thine immeasurable humility 
and endurance? * or of thy meekness and sympathy unto all, * or of thy mercy unto 
the sorrowing and thy speedy help unto those in danger, * for unto travelers by water 
thou art an untroubled haven, * and unto those travelling by land a safe passage! * 
Every adverse calamity hast thou prevented in a godly-manner, O right wondrous 
one, * and now crowned with an unfading crown * from the hands of the Almighty 
God, ** entreat Him that our souls be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy servants, ** and deliver us from 
all want and grief. 
The great Doxology: If a small Doxology is read, and a Doxasticon is 
appointed, the following is chanted after the Aposticha: 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
 Thou hast appeared, O most blessed (name), * as an earthly Angel and a 
heavenly citizen, * a fountain of compassion, a current of mercy, * an abyss of 

--- PAGE 13 ---
wonders, a stream of healings, * a divine olive-tree truly fruitful, * with the oil of thy 
labors enlightening those who faithfully honor thee, * O truly wonder-worthy one, * 
entreat the Lover of mankind to deliver from afflictions ** those who lovingly 
celebrate thine all-honorable memory.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After Our Father .., the Troparion, in Tone I: 
Having heard the voice of the Apostle Paul, exclaiming: * We are foolish for 
Christ’s sake, * Thy servant (name), O Christ God, * loved the life of the foolish for 
Thy sake on earth. * Wherefore venerating his (her) memory * we entreat Thee, O 
Lord, that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
  
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 4 from ODE III, and 4 from ODE VI. 
 With zeal hast thou stripped thyself of all for the sake of spiritual deeds and thus 
vanquished, with the help of the Divine Spirit, the armies of the enemy. (Twice) 
With wounds, prayerful abstinence and bows hast thou, O holy Father (Mother) 
(name), painfully subdued the worldly passions.  
Having joyfully desired Thy life-giving death, O Master, Thy Blessed, (name), O 
Jesus, hath starved to death the enemy.  
Directing thy mind entirely towards God in unceasing study, thou, O (name), 
mercilessly rejected the temptations of carnal love and the acquisition of earthly 
goods.  
O blessed one, whilst living in the midst of the world, thou didst not permit any 
defilement, nor spot to defile thee, but rather by thy venerable supplications, thou 
hath cleansed the defilement of the souls of those who have recourse unto thee.  
 Harboring thoughts above carnal subtlety, thou wast not affected, when bared in 
the midst of women (men), for thou O (name), hast clothed thyself in the vesture of 
dispassion.  
Theotokion: With our lips, thoughts and hearts we praise thee, O most holy 
Theotokos, for through thee we who were once rejected through the transgression of 
our fore-parents, have now been reconciled with God.  
 The Troparion and Kontakion from the Typicon, but if there be none, chant the 
following:  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
Having heard the voice of the Apostle Paul, exclaiming: * We are foolish for 
Christ’s sake, * Thy servant (name), O Christ God, * loved the life of the foolish for 
Thy sake on earth. * Wherefore venerating his (her) memory * we entreat Thee, O 
Lord, that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone VIII: 
Desiring heavenly beauty, * thou O blessed (name), didst discard the ignoble 
carnal delights of the body, * and leading a life like that of the Angels * utterly void of 
desire for things of this vain world * thou didst repose; * wherefore we beseech thee 
that together with the Angels * ye may ever intercede before Christ our God * on 
behalf of us all. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII, Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of 
His saints. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto 
me?  
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (GAL. 5: 22, 6:1-2)  
 Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they that are 
Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one 
another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou 
also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone VI, Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight. 
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth; the generation of the upright 
shall be blessed.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (6:17-23)  
 At that time, Jesus: came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the 
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and 
Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to 
be healed of their diseases; And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they 
were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out 
of him, and healed them all. And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, 
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger now: 
for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye, 
when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and 
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake. Rejoice 
ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven:  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be, he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
