--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GENERAL VIGIL SERVICE TO A HIERO-CONFESSOR  
OR MONK-CONFESSOR. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
We know thee, * O God inspired holy Father (name), * to be the foundation of 
truth * and confirmation of the faith, * the elucidation of dogmas and a model of 
piety, * an abode of purity, a select vessel, * the sweet redolence of the Spirit, * a great 
treasury of doctrines ** and a foundation of the Church of Christ. 
We praise thee, * O God-bearing, all-praised, most wise (name) * as a successor to 
the Apostles, * as one sharing the temperament of the Confessors, * a zealous 
emulator of ascetics, * the seal of teachers, * a divine representative of the sages of 
God, * a God-flowing river of understanding ** which drowneth the thoughts of 
blaspheming heretics. 
Increasing thy talent of wisdom * O spiritually rich (name), * thou wast deemed 
worthy * to participate in the joy of thy Lord; * adorned with the bright illumination * 
of divine grace * and spiritual radiance, * standing now before the life-creating right 
hand of God, ** thou art eternally resplendent. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O all-hymned Theotokos! * purify my passionate heart from pollution, * and 
cleanse, O pure one, the festering wounds of sin from my soul, * make steadfast my 
mind, * so that I, thy sinful and unprofitable servant, ** may magnify thy might and 
thy great intercession. 
Stavrotheotokion: Seeing Christ, the Lover of mankind, * crucified and with His 
side pierced with a lance, * the most pure one lamented, crying aloud: * “What is this, 
O my Son ? * What have the ungrateful people rendered unto Thee * in return for all 
the good things Thou hast rendered unto them ?” * And yet thou dost show thy 
tender compassion for me, * that I may endure my childlessness. ** I stand in awe, O 
Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion. 
If an Idiomelon be appointed, Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Grace poured forth abundantly from thy lips, * O glorious Father (name), * lamp 
of the Church of Christ, * ever teaching the spiritual sheep to believe in the Divinity 
one in essence ** and the Consubstantial Trinity.  
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, sing the 
following Dogmatic in Tone VI (If the service is a Resurrection service sing 
the Dogmatic of the Tone for that service): 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth timelessly 
from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure one; * By nature 
he is God, by nature for our sakes, he hath become a man * not divided into two 
Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * Him do thou 
beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Otherwise, Theotokion: No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin 
Theotokos, * departeth from thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** 
ever receiveth a gift for their profitable petition.  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one seeing Thee hanging upon the cross * with 
maternal tears cried aloud to Thee: * “O my Son and God, * O my sweetest Child, * 
how is it that Thou sufferest ** such a shameful death?” 
The Entrance. The Prokeimenon of the day. The Three Lessons, if appointed. 
THE READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect. 
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 

--- PAGE 3 ---
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, aye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O all-wise Father (name), * thou hast illumined the Church of Christ * with thine 
odes, * likened unto those of David * by the grace of the Spirit, * O most glorious 
Father, * striking the harp * and chanting things divine, ** thine odes draw all to the 
Church.  
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints.  
O most glorious Father (name), * abandoning the unruly noise of the world, * 
thou, O holy one, * didst reach the calm haven of Christ. * truly radiant with spiritual 
richness * through the contemplation of the Divinity, * reflecting them upon the 
faithful, * before whom thou didst shine ** with thy God-pleasing life.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight. 
Come, O ye born of earth, * let us today devoutly honor with hymns * the sacred 
and honorable memory of holy (name); * for, behold, in truth he hath been deemed 
worthy * to embrace the divine light. * O how ineffable is Thy kindness, * O Lord 
and Master, * through which we learned to glorify Thee, ** the most compassionate 
One! 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., in the same tone and melody: 
We, the multitude of monks, * honor thee as our instructor, O Father (name), * 
for we have learned from the path trodden by thee * to conduct ourselves virtuously. 
* Blessed art thou for having labored for Christ * and subduing the enemy, * O friend 
of Angels, * and companion of the righteous and holy, ** with them entreat the Lord 
that our souls may be saved.  
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, chant the Resurrection Theotokion: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * Mother 
of God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-immaculate one, 
* granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting now our 
supplications, ** pray thou that we all be saved. 
Otherwise, Theotokion: I flee to thy protection, O holy Virgin Theotokos, * for I 
know that through thee I shall obtain salvation; ** for thou art able to help me, O 
pure one.  
Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly 
nailed upon the Tree, * cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my 
most beloved Child! * How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, 
* desiring to leave me childless and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved Child?”  
The Troparion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the following 
Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O most wise (name), thou hast illumined all 
by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O most wise (name), thou hast illumined all 
by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”:  
Forsaking the enjoyment of earthly and corruptible things, * the comeliness of the 
world and temporal pleasures, * thou didst live the eremitic life, * and wast deemed 
worthy to be numbered with the choirs of Confessors and ascetics; * with them pray 
that thy servants may be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
O all-immaculate unwedded Virgin, * who hath given birth to the pre-eternal Son 
and Word of God, * do thou, together with the holy and venerable Apostles, 
Confessors, Prophets and Monastics * entreat Him to grant us cleansing and great 
mercy. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Following Christ, thou hast forsaken the world * and by abstinence subdued thy 
flesh, * wherefore O most blessed (name), * thou wast anointed with the unction of 
consecration * and hast now passed over to the incorporeal choirs, ** interceding on 
behalf of us who praise thee. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
O most pure one, * thou alone hast given birth to the Creator of all, * and 
adorned mankind with thy birth-giving, * deliver me from the snares of the flattering 
Belial, * and set me upon the rock of Christ’s commandments, ** fervently entreating 
Him, to Whom thou hast given flesh.  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify thee, O Hierarch, Father 
(name), and honor thy holy memory, for thou dost pray for us unto Christ our 
God. 
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the World. 
For a Monk-confessor: We bless thee, O Venerable Father (name), and we 
honor thy holy memory, Instructor of monks, and converser with the angels. 
Verse: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive 
unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine faith ...”:  
Enlightened by the Divine Spirit, * thou didst boldly proclaim Orthodoxy, O all-
blessed (name), * putting to shame the lawless tyrant, even suffering banishment. * O 
holy Father! Entreat Christ God * to grant remission of sins ** unto those who 
lovingly venerate thy holy memory. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Whither doth each one who is saved, * rightly have recourse; * and to what other 
such refuge can there be * which doth protect our souls like thee, ** O Theotokos?  
If of Polyeleos rank, and not a Resurrection Service, chant the following:  
The Song of Ascents: The first antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His 
saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that he hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath.  
THE HOLY GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (12, 8-12):  
The Lord said unto His Disciples: I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me 
before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the Angels of God: But he 
that denieth me before men shall be denied before the Angels of God. And 
whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but 
unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when 
they bring you unto the synagogues, and (unto) magistrates, and powers, take ye no 
thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: For the Holy Spirit 
shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say. 
After the 50th Psalm: 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of Holy Confessor (name), * O Merciful One, ** blot out 
the multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ...,  
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Then the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
O venerable Father! * the sounds of thine instructions have gone forth 
throughout all the earth, * for contemplating the orders of Angels * thou didst 
faultlessly emulate them in thy life, * destroying the armies of the demons, * 
wherefore, thou hast reaped the rewards of thy labors in heaven. * Having boldness 
now before Christ God, ** by Thine intercessions grant peace unto our souls.  
The Canon, in Tone VI:  
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
With all his thoughts our Holy Father (name) loved Thee, O Jesus, and with all 
his heart was ready to suffer for Thee, enduring sorrows, affliction and suffering, 
thereby attaining to everlasting grace.  
With the drops of thy sacred blood thou hast assuaged the bitter seas of unbelief; 
and as Christ’s sacred river, thou dost ever give proper refreshment to the Church.  
Thou, O glorious (name), bringing unto God the ascetic feats accomplished by 
thee on earth, wast deemed worthy to receive a crown in the heavenly Kingdom and 
to inherit tranquil everlasting life.  
Theotokion: Adorned with the beauty of virtues O pure Mother of God, thou 
hast, conceived the True God Who illumineth all with divine virtues. 
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
Giving neither repose unto thine eyelids, nor sleep unto thine eyes, O holy Father 
(name), till thou wast shown to be a temple of the Holy Trinity and a treasury of 
wisdom, thou hast enriched the world with thy teachings, resplendent as gold, O 
blessed one.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Locked up in prisons, O divinely-wise (name), thou wast a gate-keeper of the 
divine commandments, and by instruction thou didst open unto the faithful the gates 
leading to the path of perfect understanding.  
Like a soldier in the divine army, and strengthened by divine might, O all-sacred 
sufferer (name), thou hast vanquished the arrogant insolence of the lawless by thy 
firm confession.  
Theotokion: The Wisdom and Word of the Father, Who existed before all ages, 
and in these latter days was ineffably incarnate from thee, hath made thee the Mother 
of God, O thou who knewest not wedlock.  
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared today ...”:  
Like a morning star, * the glorious Sun placed thee on the summit of His Church 
* enlightening the faithful with thy teachings, * O heavenly (name), * our Divinely-
wise Father.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
apostles, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
purification and great mercy.  
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy most pure Mother beheld Thee uplifted upon the 
Cross, O Word of God she exclaimed, lamenting maternally: “What is this new and 
strange wonder, O my Son? How is it that Thou, the Life of all, dost taste of death 
desiring to bring life to the dead, in that Thou art compassionate?”  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
As if with a lance, thou hast, with thy words, pierced godlessness, and as if with a 
sword thou hast, by thy sufferings, obtained victory over the armies of demons, from 
whose malice deliver those who venerate thee, O all-praised (name).  
The sacred Confessor (name) cried out: I will not sacrifice to idols, neither do I 
fear death or physical tortures, for I confess One God known in the Trinity.  
Beholding the glorious height of thy humility, the Lord hath granted thee words 
of divine inspiration, with which, O Father, thou hast humbled the dark falsehoods of 
heretics.  
Theotokion: We bless thee, O Virgin, as the door and entrance leading into divine 
paradise, as the spiritual haven of sanctity, and as the beauty of Jacob.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
With the flow of thy tears, O all-wise Father (name), thou hast dried up the abyss 
of temporal delights, and by the outpouring of thy teaching thou hast dammed the 
torrents of heresies.  
O Father (name), thou wast shown to be a truly spacious temple of the Holy 
Trinity, adorned with grace, resplendent with honorable virtues and illuminating 
humility.  
By thine endurance thou didst vanquish the uprisings of the evil one, O glorious 
(name), deliver me from his assaults, and grant me courage, setting me aright on the 
path that leads to God.  
Theotokion: We hymn Him Who came forth from thee, O all-pure one, and Who 
hath taken mortal flesh, revealed in His birth as uncommingled with his Divinity.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
As a luminary thou hast enlightened the ends of the world with the light of thy 
sufferings, confessing the name of Christ before the tyrants, O all-praised sufferer of 
the Lord (name).  
Thy tongue was truly like the swift quill of a scribe; expounding the meaning of 
spiritual law, and inscribing it on the tablets of the hearts of the faithful, O Father 
(name).  
Those who swim in the calm of thine instructions, O Godly-spoken Father, avoid 
the tempests of deep deception, and those returning from heresies are saved by faith 
in them. 
Theotokion: O pure one, preserver of virginity, the Holy Spirit overshadowed 
thee, and made thee, O all-blessed one, an all-immaculate and all-honored abode of 
the Son of the Most High.  
The Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion of the Holy Confessor, in Tone II: 
Finding delight in abstinence, * thou hast subdued the desires of the flesh * 
Revealed to be nurtured in the faith, * thou hast blossomed like the tree of life in 
paradise, ** O sacred Father (name).  

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Ikos: Standing now before God, O most glorious, most sacred, and holy 
Confessor (name), by thy God-pleasing prayers open my lips, that I may hymn thy 
blessed life and worthily describe thy virtues which, fervently loving God, thou hast 
practiced on earth; for thou wast revealed to be a fearless confessor, loving vigilance, 
purity, and abstinence, by which thou hast set aright the faith, O sacred Father 
(name).  
ODE VII 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Thy life was made illustrious by abstinence, and thy suffering confirmed this, O 
divinely-wise one, for thou hast openly glorified Christ, proclaiming: “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Girding thyself with manliness and the purity of chastity, thou hast obtained by 
grace the radiant crown of Confession, O God-pleasing Father (name), crying: 
“Blessed art Thou, the God of our Fathers.”  
The wicked ones who refuse to adore Thine exceedingly pure icon, O Savior, 
have on numerous occasions deeply aggrieved Thy servant who ever crieth unto 
Thee: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Theotokion: He who sitteth uncircumscribed in the bosom of the Begetter, 
having issued from thy loins, O most pure one, sitteth now bounded in the form of 
Adam, that He may save Adam.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Appearing as radiant as the sun, O blessed (name), thou didst illumine the ends of 
the earth with thine instructions, vanquishing the darkness of every perplexing sin 
with the light of repentance.  
Issuing forth like a river from paradise, fed by the streams of divine knowledge, O 
God-pleasing (name), thou didst give nourishment to those on earth, drowning the 
tares of wickedness.  
Adorned with beautiful speech, O all-blessed one, thou wast revealed as a quill, 
devoutly writing down for the faithful thy divine contemplations, extolling Christ 
throughout the ages.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Unto thy shelter do I flee, O all-immaculate one, the protection of 
my life, thou who beyond understanding hast given birth to God the Word, Whom 
we praise throughout the ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Thou hast shone forth unto the Church of Christ, like light from a great sun, 
illumining the thoughts of the faithful; now making thine abode in the never-fading 
light, thou dost sing the Trisagion hymn unto the Uncreated Trinity.  
The earth hath been adorned with thy holy tomb and with thy sacred relics, O all-
praised (name), and the souls of the righteous rejoiced when the Angels received thy 
spirit, O blessed one; with them remember us who hymn thee.  
Thou wast a Temple of the Holy Spirit, a river filled with living water, an ever-
flowing stream, and wondrous Source of divine repentance, O (name), thou steadfast 
foundation of the Church, and standard of Orthodoxy.  
Theotokion: The heavenly rain descended into thy womb, O Virgin, drying the 
streams of deceit, and through thee, O full of God’s grace, making incorruption and 
redemption flow forth unto all mankind.  
Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
Well tried in asceticism, and finishing thy divine course in suffering, * thou hast 
ascended into heaven and standest before Christ, * O venerable Father (name), * 
fervently entreat Him on behalf of us who hymn thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O most pure one, having given birth to Christ the ineffable Joy, * make partakers 
of the heavenly joy * all those who honor thee * and who offer unto thee their 
heartfelt thanksgiving. * Forget not thy servants, O Mary blessed of God.  
On the Praises, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
The grace of the Holy Spirit, * hath brightly shone upon thee, * O Father (name), 
illumining thee * and shortening the dark night of the passions, * causing the light of 
dispassion to dawn upon thee; * Now dwelling immersed in that purest of Light, * 
forget not, O voice of God, * those who in faith ** hymn thy sacred memory. (Twice)  
Forsaking earthly things, * thou didst acquire the heavenly grace desired by thee, * 
O venerable (name), * and choosing a life of suffering, * O God-pleasing one, * thou 
didst, like the bodiless ones, * thirst for the streams of eternal beatitude, * wherefore 
drying up the murky spring of the passions by thy tears ** thou hast nourished the 
senses of thy soul.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Having worthily obtained * the grace of healing from God, * thou hast 
vanquished the seducing spirits * who sought to ensnare thee, * thereby avoiding the 
corruption of spiritual afflictions, * O holy (name), * having reposed, thou dost now 
pour forth streams of grace, * with which we are watered, ** ever hymning thy 
memory.  
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O venerable Father! * Giving neither sleep to thine eyes, * nor slumber to thine 
eyelids * till both thy soul and body were free from passion, * and an abode for the 
Holy Spirit had been prepared within thyself, * thou didst receive Christ, * Who 
together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, made their dwelling within thee; * O 
Father (name), * great preacher and favorite of the Consubstantial Trinity, ** entreat 
Him on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, 
* thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and 
refuge of our souls.  
Stavrotheotokion: Of old, the Virgin Mother, the all-blessed Maiden, beholding 
the Lamb, her Son, lifted up upon the Cross, cried out, weeping: “Woe is me, O my 
Son! How is it that Thou diest Who art in essence God immortal?”  
The great Doxology: If a small Doxology is read, and a Doxasticon is 
appointed, the following is chanted after the Aposticha: 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
We, the multitude of monks, * honor thee as our instructor, O Father (name), * 
for we have learned from the path trodden by thee * to conduct ourselves virtuously. 
* Blessed art thou for having labored for Christ * and subduing the enemy, * O friend 
of Angels, * and companion of the righteous and holy, ** with them entreat the Lord 
that our souls may be saved.  
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After Our Father ..., the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instruction of Hierarchs, * O most wise (name), thou hast illumined all 
by thy teaching; ** entreat Christ God that our souls may be saved.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
With all his thoughts our Holy Father (name) loved Thee, O Jesus, and with all 
his heart was ready to suffer for Thee, enduring sorrows, affliction and suffering, 
thereby attaining to everlasting grace. (Twice) 
With the drops of thy sacred blood thou hast assuaged the bitter seas of unbelief; 
and as Christ’s sacred river, thou dost ever give proper refreshment to the Church.  
Thou, O glorious (name), bringing unto God the ascetic feats accomplished by 
thee on earth, wast deemed worthy to receive a crown in the heavenly Kingdom and 
to inherit tranquil everlasting life.  
As a luminary thou hast enlightened the ends of the world with the light of thy 
sufferings, confessing the name of Christ before the tyrants, O all-praised sufferer of 
the Lord (name).  
Thy tongue was truly like the swift quill of a scribe; expounding the meaning of 
spiritual law, and inscribing it on the tablets of the hearts of the faithful, O Father 
(name).  
Those who swim in the calm of thine instructions, O Godly-spoken Father, avoid 
the tempests of deep deception, and those returning from heresies are saved by faith 
in them. 
Theotokion: O pure one, preserver of virginity, the Holy Spirit overshadowed 
thee, and made thee, O all-blessed one, an all-immaculate and all-honored abode of 
the Son of the Most High.  
The Troparion and Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the 
following: 
Troparion of the holy confessor, in Tone VIII: 
Teacher of Orthodoxy, instructor of piety and chastity, * luminary of the Church, 
God-inspired instructor of Hierarchs, * O most wise (name), thou hast illumined all 
by thy teaching; * entreat Christ God that our souls be saved.  
Kontakion of the holy confessor, in Tone II: 
Finding delight in abstinence, * thou hast subdued the desires of the flesh * 
Revealed to be nurtured in the faith, * thou hast blossomed like the tree of life in 
paradise, ** O sacred Father (name).  
 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: The saints shall boast in glory * and they 
shall rejoice upon their beds. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song, His praise is in the Church of His 
saints? . 
THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE EPHESIANS (6:10-17) 
Brethren: be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might Put on the whole 
armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; And your feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace; Above all, taking the shield of faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the 
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight. 
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth; the generation of the upright 
shall be blessed.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (12, 8-12) 
The Lord said: I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall 
the Son of man also confess before the Angels of God: But he that denieth me before 
men shall be denied before the Angels of God. And whosoever shall speak a word 
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth 
against the Holy Spirit it shall not be forgiven. And when they bring you unto the 
synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing 
ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same 
hour what ye ought to say. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright. 
