--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GENERAL VIGIL SERVICE OF THE HOLY FATHERS,  
IN REMEMBRANCE OF COUNCILS 
This service is always served on a Sunday. It is sung on the 7th Sunday after 
Pascha in memory of the holy Fathers of the 1st Ecumenical Council, on the Sunday 
closest to July 16th after the memory of the holy Fathers of the first six Ecumenical 
Councils; and on the Sunday closest to October 11th after the memory of the holy 
Fathers of the 7th Ecumenical Council.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, and the following 6 
Stichera from the Fathers, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The wretched ...”:  
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall stand? * 
For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Before the morning star * from the womb Thou wast begotten from the Father * 
motherless before the ages, * though Arius held Thou wast created and thus not God, 
* boldly and mindlessly identifying thee, the Creator, * with things created, * thus 
storing up fuel for the eternal fire. * But the Council gathered in Nicaea proclaimed 
that Thou, O Lord, * art truly the Son of God, ** one in rank with the Father and the 
Spirit.  
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my soul 
hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Before the morning star ..., 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
O My Savior, Who hath rent Thy raiment? * Thou didst say: It was Arius who 
hath cut asunder the Trinity’s headship, * which is one in rank and honour, * 
disputing that Thou art One of the Most Holy Trinity; * thereby teaching Nestorius 
the godless one * to not say Theotokos. * But the Council gathered in Nicaea 
proclaimed that Thou, O Lord, * art truly the Son of God, ** one in rank with the 
Father and the Spirit.  
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
O My Savior, Who hath rent Thy raiment ..., 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Keeping his eyes shut, that he might not see light, * Arius fell headlong into the 
deep pit of sin. * His bowels were rent asunder by a divine hook, * such that he 
violently gave up all his substance and his soul * and in this manner became another 
Judas, * through his most evil purpose and disposition. * But the Council gathered in 
Nicaea proclaimed that Thou, O Lord, * art truly the Son of God, ** one in rank with 
the Father and the Spirit.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of the 
Lord abideth forever. 
Mindless, foolish Arius * once divided the most holy Trinity’s sole dominion * 
thus making three essences, * dissimilar and foreign. * Hence, the God-bearing 
Fathers fervently gathered together, * burning with zeal like Elias the Tishbite, * 
cutting down with the sharp sword of the Holy Spirit * the vile blasphemer, who 
taught blasphemous doctrines. ** Thus the Spirit revealed unto them.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Let us praise today the mystic trumpets of the Spirit, * the God-bearing fathers 
who in the midst of the Church * chanted the harmonious hymn of theology, * that 
the Trinity is one and immutable in essence and divinity; * the destroyers of Arius, the 
champions of the Orthodox, * who ever pray to the Lord ** that our souls find 
mercy.  
Both now ...,  
The Dogmatic of the in Tone for the Saturday evening Vigil Service: 
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light”, 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Verse: The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse 1: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse 2: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse 3: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days. 
The readings for the Holy Fathers: 
THE READING IS FROM GENESIS (14, 14-20). 
When Abram heard that Lot his brother’s son was taken captive, he armed his 
trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued 
them unto Dan. And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, 
and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of 
Damascus. And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother’s 
son Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people. And the king of Sodom 
went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the 
kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king’s dale. And 
Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine; and he was the priest of the 
Most High God. And he blessed him and said: Blessed be Abram of the Most High 
God, Who created heaven and earth; and blessed be the Most High God, Who hath 
delivered thine enemies into thy hand.  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE READING IS FROM DEUTERONOMY (1, 8-11 AND 15-17). 
In those days spake Moses unto the sons of Israel saying: Behold, I have set the 
land before you: go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your Fathers, 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them. And I 
spake unto you at that time saying: I am not able to bear you myself alone. The Lord 
your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, you are this day as the stars of heaven for 
multitude. The Lord God of your Fathers make you a thousand times so many more 
as ye are and bless you, as He hath promised you! So I took from among you wise 
men and known and experienced, and made them heads over you, captains over 
thousands, and captains of hundreds, and captains over fifties; and captains over tens, 
and scribes unto your judges. And I charged your judges at that time, saying: Hear the 
causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his 
brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, 
but ye shall hear the small as well as the great ; ye shall not be afraid of the face of 
man; for the judgment is God’s.  
THE READING IS FROM DEUTERONOMY (10, 14-21). 
In those days spake Moses unto the sons of Israel, saying: Behold, the heaven and 
the heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is. 
Only the Lord had a delight in thy Fathers to love them, and He chose their seed after 
them, even you, above all people as it is this day. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of 
your heart, and be no more stiffnecked. For the Lord our God is God of gods, and 
Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, which regardeth not persons nor 
taketh reward; He doth execute the judgment of the Fatherless and widow, and loveth 
the stranger, in giving him food and raiment. Love ye therefore the stranger; for ye 
were strangers in the land of Egypt. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; Him shalt 
thou serve, and to Him shalt thou cleave, and swear by His name. He is thy praise, 
and he is thy God that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine 
eyes have seen.  
At the Litiya, the Stichera of the Feast of the Temple then: 
Glory ..., in Tone III:  
O holy fathers, ye were careful preservers of the Traditions of the apostles, * for, 
having taught in Orthodox manner * the consubstantiality of the holy Trinity, * in 
council ye cast down the blasphemy of Arius; * and having denounced both him and 
Macedonius, * who contended against the Spirit, * ye condemned Nestorius, 
Eutyches and Dioscorus, * Sabellius and the mindless Severus. * Pray ye that we be 
delivered from their deception, ** we beseech you to preserve our life undefiled in 
the Faith.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., in Tone III: 
Through the divine Spirit, by the will of the Father, without seed thou didst 
conceive the Son of God Who hath existed without mother from before the ages, and 
for our sake thou hast given birth in the flesh unto Him Who cameth forth from thee 
without father; and thou didst nurture Him on milk as a babe. Wherefore, cease not 
to pray, that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos. Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone IV:  
O ye assemblies of the Orthodox, * let us celebrate today with faith and piety * 
the annual memorial of the God-bearing Fathers * who, in the illustrious city of 
Nicaea, * came together from the whole inhabited world. * For with pious mind they 
refuted the godless dogma of the grievous Arius, * and by synodal decree banished 
him from the Orthodox Catholic Church. * And they instructed all to openly confess 
the consubstantial and co-eternal Son of God, * Who existed before the ages. * This, 
in exactness and piety, did they set forth in the Symbol of Faith. * Wherefore, 
following their divine doctrines and believing with assurance, ** we worship, in One 
Godhead, the Father, Son and Most holy Spirit, the Trinity one in essence. 
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
Then: “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Then the blessing of the loaves. The Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with thee; * 
blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, ** for thou 
hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Twice) 
And of the Fathers, Troparion in Tone VIII: 
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. ** O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee. (Once) 
And the Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord”, the Troparion of the Resurrection according to the Tone 
of the Vigil Service (Twice)  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * Thou hast established our Holy 
Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all in the 
true faith. ** O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 2nd and 3rd Kathismata, the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos.  
The Canon of the Resurrection with the Troparia in 6, that of the Resurrection 
and Cross in 2 each, of the Theotokos in 2 and of the Fathers in 6. The Canon is the 
work of the Holy Ecumenical Patriarch, Germanus. In Tone VI: 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory. 
With sacred words let the fathers be honored who from Nicaea. as it were from 
the sky, thundered forth the Word of the living God everywhere, showing forth His 
enemies slain by their thunder.  
With the Holy Spirit hath Christ driven the evil spirit of the Spirit-haters far from 
His Church, unifying the Church by the activity of the Second Council. 
Cyril, the leader of the Council, who clearly confessed the Virgin Mary to be the 
pure Mother and Theotokos, dispelled the deception of Nestorius the Christ-hater.  
Theotokion: O pure one, thou hast given birth unto Christ, One of the uncreated 
Trinity, in two natures and volitions, Who for thy sake hath accomplished the uniting 
of men and angels.  
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
The mindless Arius, showing himself to be a servant of a created being, and 
Macedonius, likewise revealed as abominable, are equally tormented in the fire of 
Gehenna with the Hellenes.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
With the seven sacred councils of the holy fathers didst thou adorn the honored 
Church, O Christ, driving far away the darkness of deception as with the light of 
seven beacons.  
The multifarious murrain of the heretics destroyeth Thy flock, O Word; but the 
shepherds of Thy noetic sheep have changed this by their doctrine.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast given birth unto One of the uncreated 
Trinity, Who is two in nature and volition, and Whose image we worship, filled with 
grace.  
Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection; Sessional Hymn of the fathers, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”: 
Ye have been shown to the world as most radiant beacons of the truth of Christ 
on earth, O truly most blessed and divinely eloquent fathers, having desiccated the 
heresies of the blasphemous confusion of tongues and quenched the flaming tumults 
of those who are of false faith. Wherefore, as holy hierarchs of Christ, pray ye that we 
be saved. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
By thy divine birthgiving, O pure one, * thou hast renewed the mortal nature of 
those born on earth, * which had become corrupt through the passions, * raising up 
all from death to a life of incorruption. * Wherefore, as is meet we all bless thee, ** O 
most glorious Virgin, as thou didst foretell.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Thine enemies raised a great tumult, O Savior, and they that hate Thee have lifted 
up their head a little; yet straightway they have fallen, unable to endure the blare of 
Thy spiritual trumpets.  
The suns of the Sun have with twofold radiance made clear that the Son and the 
Spirit are from the Father, uncreated, co-beginningless. The Father is believed to be 
the sole cause of both.  
Seven are the spirits which rested on Christ, Isaiah said; and Christ, with the 
Father and the divine Spirit, rested on the seven councils.  
Theotokion: From thy precious blood didst thou give birth unto God Who bore 
flesh, O pure Maiden; Him have the fathers professed to be in two natures, but in a 
single Hypostasis.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
The divine grapevine of Christ which was brought from Egypt was once 
consumed by the wild beasts of the accursed destroyer; but they have been driven far 
away with the sling of the holy fathers.  
Illumining their minds with thrice-radiant divine splendor, the honored fathers 
professed the Lord Christ to be One of the honorable Trinity and two in nature and 
volition.  
Trinitarian: O Trinity, among material things hath the Church been made heavenly 
by the wise fathers as among the seraphim; and ever chanting unto Thee the thrice-
holy hymn, it uniteth Thy threefold nature into One.  
Theotokion: Thou wast the Mother and handmaiden of thy Son, O pure one; for 
He Who came forth from thee existed before thee as thy Creator. Him do we know 
to be in two natures and we unite them in the hypostatic Word.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Once David, chanting, said: The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and He hath 
called them from the ends of all the earth, from the rising of the sun and even unto 
the setting thereof, signifying the ecumenical councils of the fathers.  
The wisdom of God hath founded seven pillars, Thy Church, O Master, which is 
maintained unshaken by all the heresies by the councils of the sacred fathers, seven in 
number.  
May shame cover the countenances of Eutyches and Dioscorus, who spake 
foolishly of a commingling of the nature of Christ; for He received the nature of 
mortal not in appearance, but in His divinity.  
Theotokion: Let Nestorius be admitted to the darkened councils of the Jews and 
let his blasphemous tongue be cut out; for the Virgin Mary gaveth birth to God Who 
became incarnate for us.  
The Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “As the first fruits ...”:  
The preaching of the apostles and the dogmas of the fathers * sealed the one Faith 
of the Church; * and clad in the robe of truth woven of theology from on high, ** it 
setteth aright and glorifieth the great mystery of piety.  
Ikos: Let us hearken unto the Church of God which crieth out with exalted 
preaching: let him that thirsteth come to me and drink the cup which I hold, for it is 
the cup of wisdom! This drink of truth have I drawn by the word, which poureth 
forth not the water of gainsaying, but of confession, which drinking, the present 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Israel beholdeth God, Who declareth: Behold ye, and see that it is I Myself Who am 
God, and I change not! I have been God from the beginning, and will be so hereafter; 
and other than Me there is no God! They that drink hereof shall be satisfied, and shall 
praise the great mystery of piety.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Once Daniel destroyed the dragon of Babylon; and by the prayers of the fathers 
hath Arius, the cruel serpent of Egypt, which devoureth the flock of Christ, been 
manifestly broken asunder.  
With unforgivable impiety the wolf Macedonius showed his disdain, striking out 
against the Spirit Who deifieth men and restoreth all the faithful to their pristine 
goodness with the laver of baptism.  
Dioscorus, Eutyches and Severus the Leviathan, the three who have commingled 
and mixed the natures of Christ with mental confusion, have struck out with audacity 
against the adored Trinity.  
Theotokion: With reverence do we venerate the image of the countenance of thine 
incarnation, O Master, and that of Thy Mother and of all the saints, knowing with 
right thought that the veneration passeth well to the Prototype.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
The Son and the Spirit shone forth as divinely planted shoots from a single Root; 
for the Father is the sole Cause, is timeless and of honor equal with the other timeless 
Hypostases.  
Thou didst timelessly shine forth from an immaterial womb, O Word Who art of 
one essence with the Father and the Spirit; yet for our sake Thou madest Thine abode 
in the material womb of the only Theotokos.  
Darts ablaze with the fire of the Spirit, the seven councils of the godly fathers 
pierced the shameful hearts of the heretical enemies and sent them to their death.  
Theotokion: Not in more than one Person do we glorify the one Christ, nor do we 
unite Him by commingling His essence; for He is one and the same Person, thy Son 
and Creator, O Virgin, distinguished by being dual in nature.  
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
One must not add or subtract ought from sacred Tradition, our Orthodox Faith; 
for therein have we faithfully been baptized. And they that add ought to this Faith 
shall be rightly given over to the ban of anathema.  
Let us all leap up in joy of heart, uniting in one feast the memory of the sacred 
councils of the fathers, for their sake have we come to behold the light of Orthodoxy; 
for they have been revealed as beacons guiding all to find the right doctrines.  
Let us ask cleansing for our souls, and let us strive to live our life piously, that we 
may have a portion with the holy fathers who have disclosed the riches of right 
doctrine unto us their children.  
Theotokion: God shone forth from thy womb, O Mother of God, and hath deified 
the human race and counted it worthy of His own glory; and He hath shown all who 
ever proclaim thee truly the Theotokos to be His heirs.  
Exapostilarion in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken O ye, women ...”: 
Celebrating the memory of the divine fathers today, by their supplications, O most 
Compassionate One, we entreat Thee: deliver Thy people, O Lord, from all the harm 
of heresies, and grant that all may glorify the Father, the Word and the most Holy 
Spirit.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone II: 
Rejoice, palace of God! Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! * Rejoice, bush unburnt! 
Rejoice, throne of glory! * Rejoice, divine table! Rejoice, golden candlestick! * Rejoice, 
most radiant lamp! ** Rejoice, O Mary, Virgin and Mother, thou light cloud!  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera of the Resurrection. and 4 of the Fathers, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside all ...”:  
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and flute. 
Having combined their spiritual art, * and reviewed the heavenly and precious 
Symbol of Faith through the divine Spirit, * the honored fathers inscribed it with a 
divine writing, * wherein the right glorious, most noetically rich and truly divine wise 
ones * teach most clearly that the Word is co-beginningless * and equally everlasting 
with Him that begot Him, ** thus following most carefully the teachings of the 
apostles.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Having combined their spiritual art, ..., 
Verse: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our Fathers, and praised and 
glorified is Thy name unto the ages.  
Having received all the noetic radiance of the Holy Spirit, * as preachers of Christ, 
the divine defenders of the teachings of the Gospel * and the traditions of the pious, 
inspired by God, * proclaimed their most supra-natural decision; * and having 
manifestly received from on high the revelation thereof, * being illumined, ** they 
expounded the Faith taught by God.  
Verse: Gather unto Him His righteous.  
Having mustered all their pastoral skill * and then being moved to wrath most 
just, as champions, * as most true servants of Christ and most sacred keepers * of the 
mysteries of divine preaching, * the divine pastors drove forth the savage and 
pernicious wolves, * casting them out of the fullness of the Church; ** and they fell, 
as it were, to their deaths as ones afflicted incurably.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The choir of the holy fathers, which hath gathered from the ends of the earth, 
hath taught the single essence of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and hath carefully 
committed to the Church the mystery of theology. Praising them in faith, let us bless 
them, saying: O divine legion, divinely eloquent swordsmen of the Lord’s command, 
most radiant stars of the noetic firmament, unassailable towers of the mystical Sion, 
sweet-scented blossoms of paradise, golden mouths of the Word, boast of Nicaea and 
adornments of the whole world: pray ye on behalf of our souls!  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art supremely blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who was 
incarnate of thee * Hell hath been taken captive, Adam recalled, the curse slain, and 
Eve set free, * death hath been put to death and we have been given life; * therefore 
with hymns we cry unto Thee: ** Blessed art Thou O Christ our God who hast been 
thus well-pleased, glory be to Thee! 
The Great Doxology.  
After the Trisagion, the Troparion of the Resurrection. The Ectinias. And the 
Dismissal.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the unread Eothinon of the Gospel. Thereupon the First 
Hour and the final Dismissal.  
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes, 6 from the Oktoechos, and the following 4 from the 
Fathers: 
The mindless Arius, showing himself to be a servant of a created being, and 
Macedonius, likewise revealed as abominable, are equally tormented in the fire of 
Gehenna with the Hellenes.  
With the seven sacred councils of the holy fathers didst thou adorn the honored 
Church, O Christ, driving far away the darkness of deception as with the light of 
seven beacons.  
The multifarious murrain of the heretics destroyeth Thy flock, O Word; but the 
shepherds of Thy noetic sheep have changed this by their doctrine.  
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou hast given birth unto One of the uncreated 
Trinity, Who is two in nature and volition, and Whose image we worship, filled with 
grace.  
Troparion of the Fathers, in Tone VIII: 
Most glorious art Thou, O Christ our God, * since Thou hast established our 
Holy Fathers as luminaries upon the earth * and through them hath instructed us all 
in the true faith. ** O Most merciful One, glory be to Thee. 
The Kontakion of the Fathers, in Tone VIII:  
The preaching of the apostles and the dogmas of the fathers * sealed the one Faith 
of the Church; * and clad in the robe of truth woven of theology from on high, ** it 
setteth aright and glorifieth the great mystery of piety.  
The Prokeimenon of the Fathers: in Tone IV: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the 
God of our Fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages. 
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS: (10: 19-31). 
Brethren: Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the 
blood of Jesus, By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through 
the veil, that is to say, his flesh; And (having) an high priest over the house of God; 
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us 
hold fast the profession of (our) faith without wavering; (for he (is) faithful that 
promised;) And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works: 
Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some (is); but 
exhorting (one another): and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching. For if 
we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery 
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses” law died 

--- PAGE 12 ---
without mercy under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, 
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of 
God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an 
unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace? For we know him that 
hath said, Vengeance (belongeth) unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And 
again, The Lord shall judge his people. (It is) a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 
the living God. 
Alleluia; of the fathers, in Tone I: The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and 
He hath called the earth from the rising of the sun and unto the setting thereof.  
Verse: Gather together unto Him His holy ones who have established His 
covenant upon sacrifices.  
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (17: 1-13). 
At that time Jesus: lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; 
glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: As thou hast given him power over 
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is 
life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou 
gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the 
glory which I had with thee before the world was. I have manifested thy name unto 
the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest 
them me; and they have kept thy word. Now they have known that all things 
whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee. For I have given unto them the words 
which thou gavest me; and they have received (them), and have known surely that I 
came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me. I pray for them: 
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. 
And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. And now I am 
no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, 
keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, 
as we (are). While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that 
thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that 
the scripture might be fulfilled. And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in 
the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves. 
Communion Verse for the Resurrection: Praise the Lord from the heavens, 
praise Him in the highest.  
Communion Verse for the saint: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is 
meet for the upright.  
