--- PAGE 1 ---
THE VIGIL SERVICE COMMON TO  
TWO OR MORE FEMALE MARTYRS. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
United by love * and sustained by devotion to their Creator * the virgin-maidens, 
by faith, * were freed from attachment to the flesh; * valiantly trampling the impotent 
enemy under their feet, * and became resplendently adorned * with the honors of 
victors * and now rejoice, having made their abode ** in the noetic bridal chambers. 
The all-honored and comely maidens * endured fire * and a multitude of tortures, 
even death. * Possessing the fairest beauty * and faith in the Bridegroom, * adorned 
with a multitude of wounds, * they were numbered with His elect; * wherefore Jesus, 
the Lover of mankind and Savior of our souls, ** hath crowned them with spiritual 
gifts. 
O virtuous maidens, * you have brought unto Christ * your most wondrous 
virginity, * and with manly understanding, * by the power of the Cross, * ye have 
overcome the deceptive allure of idolatry; * wherefore all the Churches of Christ * 
celebrate your holy memory, ** O radiant and most glorious Martyrs. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Thy supplications unto the Lord, O most pure one, * are inexhaustible * and thine 
intercessions ceaseless, * wherefore I pray thee, overcome the attacks of the adversary 
* and subdue the passions of my wretched soul; * I implore thee O Maiden, * grant 
consolation unto my sorrowing heart * and grace to my soul ** that I may worthily 
glorify thee. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding Thee, * the Lamb and Shepherd, upon the 
Tree, * the ewe-lamb who bore Thee lamented, * and maternally exclaimed to Thee: * 
“O most desired Son, * how is it that Thou art suspended upon the tree of the Cross? 
* How is it that Thine arms and legs are nailed * by the iniquitous ones, O long-
suffering Word, ** and that Thou hast shed Thy blood, O Master?”  
If an Idiomelon be appointed, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Let every tongue be moved to praise * the all-famed and meek martyrs; * let every 
generation, old and young, * youths and maidens, * adore the great martyrs of Christ; 
* for having exerted themselves lawfully and put aside the weakness of their flesh, * 
they crushed the tormenting enemy, * and now adorned with heavenly and divine 
crowns * in reward for their labors of martyrdom, ** they entreat their Bridegroom 
and God to grant us great mercy.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, sing the 
following Dogmatic in Tone VIII (If the service is a Resurrection service sing 
the Dogmatic of the Tone for that service): 
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Otherwise, Theotokion: O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy 
servants, ** and deliver us from all want and grief. 
Stavrotheotokion: When the most pure one beheld Thee hanging on the Cross in 
the flesh, her heart was pierced, and with tears she cried aloud: “O Word, whence 
hast Thou gone, O my most beloved Son and Lord; leave me not alone who hath 
given birth to Thee O Christ.” 
The Entrance. The Prokeimenon of the day. The Three Lessons, if appointed. 
THE READING IS FROM ISAIAH 
Thus saith the Lord: Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people 
be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them 
bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: our let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: 
that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was 
no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the LORD; and beside 
me there is no savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there 
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, that I 
am God. Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of 
my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the LORD, your Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all 
their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships. Thus saith the Lord. The 
Holy One of Israel 
THE READING IS FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 

--- PAGE 3 ---
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect.  
THE READING IS FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The righteous live unto the ages; their reward is also with the Lord, and the care 
of them is with the most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand, for with His right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate and true judgment instead of an helmet. 
He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a 
sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-
arming thunderbolts go abroad, and from the clouds, as from a welldrawn bow, shall 
they fly to the mark. And from the hailstones full of wrath and cast as out of a sin 
Tone bow the cities shall fall down, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, 
and the floods shall cruelly drown them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against 
them, and like a storm shall blow them away; thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole 
earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow the Thrones of the mighty. Hear therefore, O ye 
kings, and understand; learn ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye 
that rule the people and glory in the multitude of nations, for power is given you of 
the Lord and sovereignty from the Highest.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
The choirs of Angels stood in amazement at your wholehearted zeal, * divine love 
and your unity in sufferings, O blessed ones, * for having manfully conquered the 
invisible enemy by your united struggles, * ye have worthily and readily received 
crowns of victory * from the life-bearing Hand of the Savior. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
By the machinations of a furious falsehood * you were put to death for the sake 
of Christ, * but by extinguishing the flame of vanity, * and keeping the flame of your 
soul’s lamps lit, * ye have entered together into the heavenly palace of Christ; * 
wherefore, we all, enlightened by your grace, * reverently hymn your holy memory, O 
great sufferers. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: In the Congregations bless ye God, the Lord, * from the wellsprings of 
Israel. 
Enduring much suffering and a multitude of tortures, * and resolutely 
withstanding them O all-praised ones, * you were translated and admitted into the 
glory of the never-waning effulgence, * and divine and everlasting enjoyment; * 
wherefore we bless you and commemorate your holy memory, * most blessed and 
godly passion-bearers.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Setting aside as transient * O all-famed martyrs, * the pleasures of temporal life, * 
the delight of food and the glory of prosperity, * you were moved by the fairness of 
His beauty, * to devote yourselves to Christ in martyrdom, * wherefore He hath 
received you as sweetest and most fragrant roses * and adorned you with crowns in 
His eternal Kingdom, * O godly-proclaimed passion-bearers. 
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, chant the Resurrection Theotokion: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
Otherwise, Theotokion: O thou inextinguishable lamp, * and throne of 
righteousness * most pure Sovereign Lady: ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Stavrotheotokion: Seeing Christ, the Lover of mankind, * crucified and with His 
side pierced with a lance, * the most pure one lamented, crying aloud: * “What is this, 
O my Son ? * What have the ungrateful people rendered unto Thee * in return for all 
the good things Thou hast rendered unto them ?” * And yet thou dost show thy 
tender compassion for me, * that I may endure my childlessness. ** I stand in awe, O 
Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion. 
The Troparion from the Typicon; if there be none, chant the following: 
Troparion, in Tone I: 
As rational sheep of Christ, the Lamb and the Shepherd, * you undertook the 
struggle of Martyrdom, * and finishing your course ye have preserved the faith, * 
wherefore, O right worthy Passion-bearers, * with gladsome hearts we celebrate today 
** your holy memory, magnifying Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone I:  
As rational sheep of Christ, the Lamb and the Shepherd, * you undertook the 
struggle of Martyrdom, * and finishing your course ye have preserved the faith, * 
wherefore, O right worthy Passion-bearers, * with gladsome hearts we celebrate today 
** your holy memory, magnifying Christ. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb O Savior ...”:  
Burning with the fire of divine desire, * O blessed ones, * you remained unburned 
by immersion in material fire, * rather, by those flames, you scorched the beguilement 
of idolatry, * and having suffered numerous merciless tortures, O ever-memorable 
Martyrs, * you attained the desire of your hearts * and inherited eternal Glory ..., 
(Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most blessed Mary, * thou who knew not wedlock, * God’s dwelling place, and 
the refuge of despairing mankind, * set upon the path of repentance, * we who 
constantly turn to the path of self-will, ** and thereby anger the Most kind Lord. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph marveled ...”:  
The choirs of the bodiless powers of heaven * stood awestruck by your 
endurance; * For it seemed as if ye were witnessing the sufferings of others, * even 
though your own legs and joints were broken * and ye suffered a most bitter death, * 
you destroyed the apostate serpent with your fragile bodies, * O ye virgins and brides 
of the Giver of Life, ** champions of the faith. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 
 
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify you, O holy Martyrs, and 
honor your precious sufferings which you endured for the sake of Christ.  
Verse: Our God is refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which mightily 
befall us. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the wisdom ...”:  
Betrothed unto the Lord * In a right godly manner, * ye passion-bearing maidens 
brought unto Him your blood and your self-sacrifice * as a most precious dowry, * 
with which you inherited a place in the divine palaces on high * unceasingly partaking 
of the most ineffable illumination; * wherefore, worthily celebrating your holy and 
honorable memory, * we glorify our Savior and in faith cry aloud: * “Beseech Christ 
God that He grant remission of sins to those who with love honor your holy 
memory.” (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
By the prayers of Thy bodiless ones, O Christ, * and the Forerunner, * of the 
disciples, prophets and martyrs, * of all Thy saints and venerable ones, * and of Thy 
blessed Mother, * we beseech Thee; grant us to walk in Thy light, * and deem us 
worthy to receive Thy Kingdom ** for the sake of Thy compassionate mercy. 
If of Polyeleos rank, and not a Resurrection Service, chant the following:  
The Song of Ascents: The first antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In the Congregations bless ye God, the Lord, from the wellsprings of 
Israel. 
Let every breath ..., 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (15: 21-28) 
At that time, Jesus departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. And, behold, a 
woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have 
mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a 
devil. But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, 
saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us. But he answered and said, I am not sent 
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came she and worshipped him, 
saying, Lord, help me. But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children’s 
bread, and to cast it to dogs. And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the 

--- PAGE 7 ---
crumbs which fall from their masters” table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, 
O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was 
made whole from that very hour. 
After the 50th Psalm: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the holy martyrs (names), * O Merciful One, ** blot out 
the multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ...,  
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Then the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Setting aside as transient * O all-famed martyrs, * the pleasures of temporal life, * 
the delight of food and the glory of prosperity, * by the fairness of His beauty, * you 
were moved to devote yourselves to Christ in martyrdom * wherefore He received 
you as sweetest and most fragrant roses * and adorned you with crowns in His eternal 
Kingdom, ** O godly-proclaimed ones. 
The Canon, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Holy Martyrs (names) pray to God for us 
Ye mightily battled the enemy, O maiden martyrs, first by fasting and thereupon 
by the cruel shedding of your blood; wherefore in faith we honor your sacred 
memory. 
Moved by love for Him Who for our sake suffered both the Cross and death, the 
holy maiden martyrs following in His footsteps, disregarded the inherent weaknesses 
of their bodies. 
O most honorable maiden Martyrs, with the weapon of martyrdom ye have 
overthrown the sacrificial temples of the Hagarenes, with their armies of demons, and 
as whole burnt offerings you have been led into the heavenly Church. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: Strengthened by the grace of Him Who hath shone forth ineffably 
from thy womb, O most immaculate one, the virgin-maidens underwent the pangs of 
martyrdom, and following thee they rejoiced as they were led into the kingdom of 
heaven. 
ODE III 
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been rendered impotent * and the infirm 
are now girded with strength; * wherefore my heart is established in the Lord. 
Strengthened by God with mighty power, ye have overthrown the might of the 
adversary, and are famed as invincible trophy-bearers. 
Through Christ’s divine power the jaws of the beast gaped in vain, for ye were 
delivered from them unharmed, O divinely-wise ones, glorifying God. 
With minds enlightened with wisdom and grace, O maiden Martyrs of the Savior, 
and sustained by God’s strength, you remained un-frightened by the threats of your 
tormentors. 
Theotokion: With right worship we proclaim thee to be the true all-immaculate 
Mother of God, for through thee the Creator of all was pleased to be united with us. 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Acquiring in you a source of miracles, * O all-famed martyrs, * we have been 
granted an abundance of healings, * wherefore we praise your sufferings and divine 
zeal, * your wounds and valiant endeavors, ** and to the glory of our God, we 
celebrate your wondrous memorial.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Do thou accept, O Theotokos, * the entreaties of thy servants, * and deliver us 
from every difficulty, * since thou hast given birth unto the Savior Christ, ** the 
Redeemer of our souls. 
Stavrotheotokion: Possessing thine intercession, O most pure one, * and delivered 
from evils by thy supplications, * protected wholly by the Cross of thy Son, ** we all 
reverently magnify thee as is meet.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Suffering tortures and grievous bodily wounds, the breaking of your limbs, and 
being thrown into fire, ye have inherited a place in the heavenly abodes, where ye 
unceasingly delight in the Tree of life, O right wondrous ones. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The heavenly powers stood amazed at the struggles of the blessed maiden 
martyrs, for though possessing a feminine nature, they vanquished the enemy, 
strengthened by the power of Him Who hath shone forth from the Virgin. 
Rejecting the vanity of this world, ye have fervently devoted yourselves to God 
alone; wherefore ye endured the anguish of fasting and a multitude of tortures, O 
long-suffering brides of Christ. 
Theotokion: Into thy womb, O most immaculate one, the Lord descended like 
the dew upon the fleece of Gideon, as the Prophet of old described; and brought 
Him forth in two natures, wherefore we cry unto Him; “Glory to Thy might, O 
Christ!” 
ODE V 
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise early 
to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of Thy 
Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
As unblemished lambs, and perfect and pleasing whole-burnt offerings, ye were 
brought unto Christ the True Shepherd. 
O maiden Martyrs, like Him Who slew the might of death by enduring the Cross, 
death and His voluntary passion, ye have died in the body, but been quickened in 
your souls. 
The divinely-wise ones, being of one mind while in separate bodies, ye were cut 
asunder in many ways, burned with fire, while confessing the only Jesus Christ, the 
Lord of all.  
Theotokion: Raise me up who am fallen into the pit of passions and grant me 
correction, O all-immaculate one, for thou hast brought forth God, the Governor, 
Who by grace hath joined together that which of old was separated. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * “I will sacrifice unto Thee 
with a voice of praise” * having been cleansed of the blood of the demons” * 
by the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
The first mother Eve divinely rejoiceth, seeing the serpent who had first driven 
her from Eden through flattery, now overthrown and trodden underfoot by the 
maiden Martyrs. 
Joining fasting with lawful pangs, you have now been united with the spiritual 
Bridegroom in purity, and with gladsome voices, made your abodes in the heavenly 
mansions. 
The waves of the tormentors were unable to submerge the ship-like martyrs, for 
the lofty arm of God protected and guided them to the divine haven.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Beholding now the fulfillment of thy prophetic words, we yet more 
magnify thee, O Mother of God, and Him Who hath exalted thee; for truly all 
generations now call the blessed. 
The Kontakion from the Typicon; if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
We who celebrate the feast of Christ’s martyred spiritual athletes * now pray in 
faith that we be granted their aid, * crying out; “God, Who hath willed to glorify His 
maiden martyrs, is with us.” 
Ikos: Having acquired a source of miracles in you, O most praiseworthy maiden 
Martyrs of Christ, we have been granted an abundance of healings, wherefore we 
praise your sufferings and divine zeal, your wounds and valiant feats, and to the glory 
of our God celebrate your wondrous memory crying out: “God, Who willed to glorify 
His maiden Martyrs, is with us.” 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thou didst save the children of Abraham in the fire * and slay the 
Chaldeans, * who unjustly entrapped the righteous ones. * O supremely 
hymned Lord, God of our fathers, * blessed art Thou.  
With the eyes of their hearts turned toward God the Savior and King, the ewe-
lambs of Christ stood boldly before all kinds of wicked allurements and manfully 
vanquishing then, exclaimed: “O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.” 
Focusing all of your desire solely on the Master, O maiden Martyrs, you counted 
the attractions of temporal life to be but a mere dream, exclaiming: “O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.” 
While standing before the judgment seat the valiant maiden Martyrs cried aloud; 
“Behold, the gates to the palace are open let us not be faint-hearted, for Christ 
beareth our crowns, rather let us manfully confess our faith, not sparing our bodies.”  
Theotokion: Blessed is the Fruit of thy blessed womb, O pure one; bless Him, O 
blessed one, and ye heavenly powers and ye assemblies of mortals, bless Him also as 
One Who hath delivered us from the primal curse. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Through the blood of Martyrdom you have clothed yourselves in bright 
garments, in truth putting off the old-man corrupted by sins, while chanting: “O all ye 
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.” 
By the bright effulgence of the divine light of the spiritual Sun, you have, O all-
famed Martyrs, traversed the dark night of godlessness, singing as if with one spirit: 
“O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages “. 
Like ewe-lambs and pure bullocks, and like Godly doves you offered yourselves 
as voluntary sacrifices, O maiden Martyrs, unto your Creator, singing with one voice: 
“O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages “. 
Theotokion: The maiden-Martyrs followed in Thine entourage, O most pure 
Bride of God, yearning for the sweet-smelling Myrrh that shone forth from thy 
womb, even thy Son, thine only Child, and in truth they reign with thee, hymning 
Christ and supremely exalting Him throughout the ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the Offspring of 
thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * Wherefore, we all 
magnify thee.  
Like waters from a spring the most glorious maiden martyrs bestow healing upon 
those who seek it from them, allaying the sufferings of the diseased, driving away the 
armies of demons, and watering with fruitful divine activity, the hearts of those who 
love God. 
Having obtained power over your enemies, O brides of God, ye have become 
angelic and now freely partake of the delights of the source of all goodness from the 
tree of life in paradise, praying for the whole world. 
The celebration of your memory, O maiden Martyrs, shining with divine 
illuminating grace, illumineth the thoughts of those who praise you.  
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be an abode of wisdom, beyond 
recounting, and a spiritual throne and portal, O undefiled Virgin, wherefore the pure 
virgins, the holy maiden martyrs who loved thee as their Queen, were ushered into 
heaven in thy mystical entourage. 
Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
By all means desiring to behold the comeliness of the Bridegroom, * and having 
heeded His call, * ye have been granted immortality in your mortal bodies, O God-
bearing ones; * wherefore ye are rightly blessed.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
When Thou comest in Thy glory to judge the world * O Christ, do Thou spare 
me, * and by the intercessions of her who bore Thee, * and of Thy honorable maiden 
Martyrs, ** dispel the fog of my passions, since Thou art good and abundantly 
merciful.  
On the Praises, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”:  
Adorning yourselves with the shedding of your blood * O virgin-maidens, * in a 
most pure manner * ye have united yourselves with the comely One, * Christ our 
God, * Who hath preserved your virginity undefiled, * in the eternal bridal-chambers 
of the heavenly tabernacle, * in the palaces not made with hands, ** O all-famed 
Martyrs. (Twice) 
In imperfect bodies, * but with perfected minds O glorious ones, * ye have 
vanquished the ancient serpent, * the origin of all evil, * revealing the weakness of his 
strength * by the power of your spirit, * wherefore, O all-famed martyrs, * champions 
of the Trinity, ** ye have received crowns of victory. 
Neither the breaking of your limbs, * nor the burning of your bodies, * neither 
being torn with iron teeth, * nor being hung upon crosses * and cut asunder with 
swords * could make you reject Christ, * O all-famed martyrs; * wherefore ye have 
been granted crowns of victory, ** as champions of the Holy Trinity. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Having lived a pure life and vanquished the godless judges, * ye have been 
revealed as staunchly victorious, * O honorable ones; * adorned with brightness, O 
godly radiant flowers, * and vested with God’s strength * ye have spurned the 
commands of the tyrants, * and mocked the empty speeches of pagan orators, ** O 
divinely-wise maiden martyrs. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All of my hope do I place on thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy 
protection.  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * willingly 
led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now hasten to leave 
me childless who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that Thou hast done, O 
Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine extreme goodness, * which 
is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of mankind!”  
The great Doxology: If a small Doxology is read, the following is chanted after 
the Aposticha: 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Setting aside as transient * O all-famed martyrs, * the pleasures of temporal life, * 
the delight of food and the glory of prosperity, * you were moved by the fairness of 
His beauty, * to devote yourselves to Christ in martyrdom, * wherefore He hath 
received you as sweetest and most fragrant roses * and adorned you with crowns in 
His eternal Kingdom, * O godly-proclaimed passion-bearers. 
Otherwise, Theotokion: O thou inextinguishable lamp, * and throne of 
righteousness * most pure Sovereign Lady: ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
After Our Father ..., the Troparion, in Tone I: 
As rational sheep of Christ, the Lamb and the Shepherd, * you undertook the 
struggle of Martyrdom, * and finishing your course ye have preserved the faith, * 
wherefore, O right worthy Passion-bearers, * with gladsome hearts we celebrate today 
** your holy memory, magnifying Christ.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
  
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
Strengthened by God with mighty power, ye have overthrown the might of the 
adversary, and are famed as invincible trophy-bearers. (Twice) 
Through Christ’s divine power the jaws of the beast gaped in vain, for ye were 
delivered from them unharmed, O divinely-wise ones, glorifying God. 
With minds enlightened with wisdom and grace, O maiden Martyrs of the Savior, 
and sustained by God’s strength, you remained un-frightened by the threats of your 
tormentors. 
The first mother Eve divinely rejoiceth, seeing the serpent who had first driven 
her from Eden through flattery, now overthrown and trodden underfoot by the 
maiden Martyrs. 
Joining fasting with lawful pangs, you have now been united with the spiritual 
Bridegroom in purity, and with gladsome voices, made your abodes in the heavenly 
mansions. 
The waves of the tormentors were unable to submerge the ship-like martyrs, for 
the lofty arm of God protected and guided them to the divine haven.  
Theotokion: Beholding now the fulfillment of thy prophetic words, we yet more 
magnify thee, O Mother of God, and Him Who hath exalted thee; for truly all 
generations now call the blessed. 
The Troparion and Kontakion from the Typicon. If there be none, chant the 
following:  
Troparion, in Tone I: 
As rational sheep of Christ, the Lamb and the Shepherd, * you undertook the 
struggle of Martyrdom, * and finishing your course ye have preserved the faith, * 
wherefore, O right worthy Passion-bearers, * with gladsome hearts we celebrate today 
** your holy memory, magnifying Christ.  
Kontakion, in Tone IV:  
We who celebrate the feast of Christ’s martyred spiritual athletes * now pray in 
faith that we be granted their aid, * crying out; “God, Who hath willed to glorify His 
maiden martyrs, is with us.” 
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In the Congregations bless ye God, the Lord, from the wellsprings of 
Israel. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
THE 2nd EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS (6:1-10) 
Brethren: We then, as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye receive 
not the grace of God in vain. (For he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and 
in the day of salvation have I succoured thee: behold, now is the accepted time; 
behold, now is the day of salvation.) Giving no offence in any thing, that the ministry 
be not blamed: But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much 
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, In stripes, in imprisonments, in 
tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings; By pureness, by knowledge, by 
longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, By the word of 
truth, by the power of God, by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on 
the left, By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and 
yet true; As unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as 
chastened, and not killed; As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making 
many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto 
me, * and hearkened unto my supplication. 
Verse: And he brought me out of the pit of misery, out of the mire of clay. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK: (5:24-34) 
At that time, Jesus went: and much people followed him, and thronged him. And 
a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years, And had suffered many 
things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, 
but rather grew worse, When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and 
touched his garment. For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole. 
And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in (her) body 
that she was healed of that plague. And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that 
virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my 
clothes? And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, 
and sayest thou, Who touched me? And he looked round about to see her that had 
done this thing. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in 
her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. And he said unto her, 
Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, praise is meet for the 
upright 
