--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GENERAL SERVICE TO A MONK-MARTYR. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the Stichera, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”:  
Let us, O faithful, as is meet, * praise the ascetic feats, and pangs, * of the wise 
faster and warrior of Christ, * and cry out unto the Lord: * By his prayers, O Christ 
God, ** deliver us from every evil circumstance. 
An abundance of most gracious peace * hath been granted thee from God, * O 
venerable father (name), * for thou didst endure * the turbulent storm of torments, * 
O invincible warrior, ** ever intercede for those who praise thee. 
Thou, O wise one, having suffered lawfully, * and been most wisely disposed to 
God, * became another temple of the Fashioner of all that is, * and revealed to be a 
god-bearing martyr, * thou light of the church, ** and adornment of the venerable. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O pure Virgin Theotokos, * entreat the Lord that by thine intercessions, * He 
grant our souls remission of sins, ** peace and great mercy. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, * the all-
immaculate Theotokos cried aloud, * maternally lamenting: ** O my Son and my 
God, save those who with love hymn Thee!  
If an Idiomelon be appointed, Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O venerable father, * thou didst not give sleep to thine eyes, * nor slumber to 
thine eyelids, * until thou didst free thy mind and body from the passions, * and 
prepare thyself to be a habitation of the Spirit; * Wherefore Christ having come unto 
thee with His Father * made His abode within thee. * O great preacher and venerable 
one, * having received the grace of the Consubstantial Trinity, ** pray thou for our 
souls.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is meet, 
* thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession and 
refuge of our souls.  
Spec. Mel.: “We bless thee ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: Of old, the Virgin Mother, the all-blessed Maiden, beholding 
the Lamb, her Son, lifted up upon the Cross, cried out, weeping: “Woe is me, O my 
Son! How is it that Thou diest Who art in essence God immortal?”  
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, chant 
the following Dogmatic of Tone V (If the service is a Resurrection service 
chant the Dogmatic of the Tone for that service ): 

--- PAGE 2 ---
In the Red Sea of old * an image of the Bride who knew not wedlock was 
depicted. * There Moses was the one who parted the sea, * here Gabriel is the 
minister of the miracle. * At that time Israel marched dry-shod through the deep, * 
now the Virgin doth seedlessly give birth to Christ. * The sea after Israel’s passage 
remained impassable; * the Immaculate one after bearing Emmanuel remained 
incorrupt. * O God, who doth exist and is pre-eternal, * and hath appeared as man, 
** have mercy upon us. 
The Entrance. The Prokeimenon of the day. The Three Lessons, if appointed. 
THE READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON 
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect. 
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of 
them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with his right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight with 
Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and 
from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall they be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, aye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you by the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. For 
honorable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by 

--- PAGE 3 ---
number of years. But wisdom is the gray hair un to men, and an unspotted life is old 
age. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him: so that living among sinners he was 
translated. Yea, speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his 
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the bewitching of naughtiness doth 
obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth undermine 
the simple mind. He, being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: for his 
soul pleased the Lord; therefore hasted He to take him away from among the wicked. 
This the people saw, and understood not, neither laid they up this in their minds: that 
His grace and mercy is with His saints, and that He hath respect unto His chosen. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised Martyrs ...”:  
O all-famed (name), * thou didst dedicate thy life * to the cultivation of the 
virtues; * wherefore the faithful who with faith praise Christ, * were humbled by thy 
doctrines, * and having confirmed them while in the world, * and standing now 
before the Divine Spirit, ** ever beseech Him for us. 
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints. 
Thy life, O divinely inspired martyr (name), * was revealed to be * equal to that of 
the angels, * and like a sacrifice * of fragrant and precious incense, * thy confession 
was brought unto those on high. * Do thou now pray ** that our souls be granted 
peace and great mercy. 
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, * in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight. 
Having been abundantly rich * in the vanquishing the passions, * thou, O (name), 
didst triumph over the tyrant; * and exulting now together with the crown-bearers, * 
remember, O blessed one, * all those who celebrate thy memory, * and entreat Christ 
** to grant our souls peace and great mercy.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
O venerable martyr (name), with the help of the Spirit * thou didst vanquish the 
embittered enemy, * and as an invincible warrior, * thou didst slay the noetic 
Ethiopians * with the weapon of the faith, * and having lawfully completed thine 
ascetic endeavors, * thou hast been crowned together with all the choirs of the 
martyrs, ** O most noetically rich and venerable martyr. 
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, chant the Resurrection Theotokion: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O all-immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
Otherwise, Theotokion: Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * 
thou who hast given birth to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O thou who alone art the intercessor for our souls!  
Stavrotheotokion: Seeing Christ, the Lover of mankind, * crucified and with His 
side pierced with a lance, * the most pure one lamented, crying aloud: * “What is this, 
O my Son ? * What have the ungrateful people rendered unto Thee * in return for all 
the good things Thou hast rendered unto them ?” * And yet thou dost show thy 
tender compassion for me, * that I may endure my childlessness. ** I stand in awe, O 
Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary crucifixion. 
The Troparion from the Typicon, but if there be none, chant the following:  
Troparion, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable (name).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable (name). (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having been lifted up ...”: 
Having despised the pleasures of earthly and corruptible things, * and loved the 
eremitic life, * thou didst reject temporal food and all the beauty of the world, * and 
wast thereby deemed worthy * to be a participant in the choir of martyrs and fasters. 
** Do thou pray together with them that thy faithful servants be saved. (Twice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
He that sitteth upon the throne of the cherubim * and abideth in the bosom of 
the Father * doth sit in thy womb as upon a throne, O Lady; * for, being truly God 
incarnate, * He reigneth over all nations, * and with understanding we now chant to 
Him. * Him do thou also entreat, ** that thy servants be saved.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the Wisdom ...”: 
Imitating the fasting of John the Baptist, * and the virtues of Elijah the Tishbite, * 
thou didst live a life likened to the immaterial angels, * and together with them thou 
dost glorify the Holy and Divine Trinity, * having valiantly defeated the assaults of 
demons; * wherefore O blessed (name), * having suffered, and manfully executed thy 
noetic warfare, * and confessed Christ’s divine incarnation and Godhead; * Do thou 
ever beseech Him to grant remission of sins ** unto those who lovingly celebrate thy 
sacred memory. (Twice).  
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the 
Virgin who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the 
flesh; * for the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst feed 
the Creator and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of mankind 
and of angels, * worthily glorify thine all-holy birthgiving, * and together we cry out 
to thee: * Entreat Christ God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with 
faith worship thine all-holy Offspring.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We bless thee, O Venerable Father-
Martyr, and we honor thy holy memory, Instructor of monks and converser 
with the Angels.  
Verse: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive 
unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast appeared ...”:  
As one proficient in abstinence, * thou didst shine forth in martyrdom * en-
lightening the faithful with thine ascetic endeavors, * O blessed (name); ** wherefore 
we all with one voice magnify thee. (Twice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite Godhead in thy womb * Who, 
in His love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance from 
thee, * deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly take pity * 
and free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.  
If of Polyeleos rank, and not a Resurrection Service, chant the following:  
The Song of Ascents: The first antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His 
saints.  
Verse: What shall I render unto the Lord for all that he hath rendered unto 
me?  
Let every breath ..., 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (8:34 - 9:1)  
The Lord said: Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up 
his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever 
shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel’s, the same shall save it. For what shall it 
profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a 
man give in exchange for his soul? Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and 
of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man 

--- PAGE 7 ---
be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels. And he 
said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, 
which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with 
power. 
After the 50th Psalm: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the venerable (name), * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ...,  
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Then the Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
O venerable martyr (name), with the help of the Spirit * thou didst vanquish the 
embittered enemy, * and as an invincible warrior, * thou didst slay the noetic 
Ethiopians * with the weapon of the faith, * and having lawfully completed thine 
ascetic endeavors, * thou hast been crowned together with all the choirs of the 
martyrs, ** O most noetically rich venerable martyr. 
The Canon, in Tone VI 
ODE I  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing their 
pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song of 
victory.  
From the seductions of life and from the passions that torment me, do thou set 
my mind at rest, O venerable spiritual athlete, that I may be found worthy to praise 
thy memory in peace. 
As a martyr, thou wast crowned with a diadem of suffering, O venerable (name), 
and thereby translated from the earth into the world free from struggles, unto the true 
Light and Life, O most blessed one. 
With the streams of thy blood thou didst extinguish the flames of the tyrants, and, 
O venerable martyr, thereby water the souls of the faithful, arousing within them the 
desire for eternal life, O venerable one. 
Theotokion: Since thou hast given birth unto the uncircumscribable Word, Who 
made His abode within thy womb, O divine tabernacle, do thou deliver me, O pure 
one, from the tempests of the evil one, which ever oppress me. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast exalted 
the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon the rock * of 
Thy confession. 
O venerable father, fortified by God’s strength, thou, O most blessed spiritual 
athlete, didst undertake the endurance of afflictions and torments from the tyrants. 
The greatest of strugglers, even Christ, endowed thee with strength to destroy 
deception, and to put to shame the enemy, who impudently boasted, everywhere 
raging in vain. 
Beautiful appear thy feet, O venerable one, traversing joyfully the path of 
martyrdom, covering the heads of the wicked with shame, O great sufferer (name). 
Theotokion: Let us hymn pure Mary - the palace of the Master - whom Jacob of 
old clearly foresaw as a divine ladder stretching from the earth to heaven. 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joseph was amazed ...”:  
In truth thou wast thrice baptized; the first: of water and the fire of the Holy 
Spirit, the second: in the ascetic struggles thou didst willingly endure, having lived on 
earth a life equal to that of the angels, the third, O blessed (name): when thou, like a 
chosen lamb, wast slain for Christ our God. Him do thou unceasingly entreat that our 
souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
As he contemplated that which was beyond nature * Joseph was struck with 
wonder O Theotokos, at thy conception without seed. * He contemplated the 
mysterious dew upon the fleece, * the bush un-burnt by fire, * Aaron’s rod which 
budded. * Thus thy Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried unto the priests 
saying: * A Virgin beareth a child, ** and after child-birth remaineth yet a virgin. 
Stavrotheotokion: The thoughts of many a heart are being laid bare and mine own 
mind is pierced with the lance of Thy passion, in Thy voluntary sufferings: O Child! 
Who seeing my lamentations and bodily sufferings will recognize in Thee the most 
truly existing God? I hymn, O Word, Thy compassion for the sake of which dost 
Thou endure the crucifixion. 
ODE IV  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church divinely 
singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
In accordance with the law thou didst observe the fasts, suffering legitimately, and 
wast therefore crowned, being fortified by God’s word and preserving thyself 
unharmed, O most blessed one. 
Suffering not to follow the path of falsehood, in thy wisdom O venerable one, 
thou didst traverse joyfully the path of the knowledge of God, and imbued with 
noetic light, thou hast been revealed to be a beacon of light. 
In a sacred manner, thou didst offer thyself as voluntary and holy sacrifice, O 
(name), unto Him, Who was slain for thee, wherefore thou hast now found rest 
rejoicing in the temple of the first-born.  
Theotokion: Thou didst remain a Virgin after giving birth, just as thou wast a 
Virgin before thy birthgiving, for thou hast given birth unto God the Word Who hath 
delivered us from corruption by thine intercessions, O most immaculate one. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of those 
who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, O Word 
of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin. 
The enemy was smitten with the great endurance of the wise martyr; for having 
been trodden underfoot and put to shame, he became a subject of derision. 
Having repulsed the malice of the tyrant, thou, O all-honored martyr, appearing 
meek and gentle, hast by thy bloody end been adorned with an incorruptible crown. 
Thou hast truly been crowned with the honors of a martyr, and by the labors of 
fasting, O venerable (name), the longsuffering God fortified thee against the slayer of 
mankind.  
Theotokion: The god-seeing choir of prophets, having mystically perceived thine 
ineffable divine birthgiving, O Virgin bride of God, proclaimed thee from afar in 
sacred images. 
ODE VI  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * I 
run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from corruption, * 
O greatly Merciful One. 
Steered by the life-creating arm, thou didst sit upon the waters and remain 
unharmed, O our father, but the commands of the persecutor were drowned therein 
by thine ardent prayer, O all-sacred one. 
By small things thou didst effect great things, for having given thyself up to mar-
tyrdom O divinely revealed one, by the spirit thou didst slay the serpent, the seducer 
of Eve. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Unable to bear the power of thy discourse, the flattering begetter of evil savagely 
gave thee over to chains, wounds and a violent death, O (name).  
Theotokion: Behold, the Lord hath now assumed flesh from thy pure blood, O 
Virgin Theotokos, uniting Himself to mankind in an supra-natural manner, bringing 
about our salvation through His unspeakable mercy. 
The Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone II:  
As a pious and capable faster, * as an all-honored and willing martyr, * and as one 
who led an eremitic life in the desert, * let us worthily extol in hymns the ever-lauded 
(name), ** for he hath trampled the serpent underfoot. 
Ikos: Emulating the Lord’s passion O most blessed one, thou didst harbor the 
desire to sacrifice thyself for Him, and having manfully struggled against the 
adversaries, thou didst destroy the delusion of idolatry, bringing to naught the 
cunning machinations and wiles of the enemy, and hast thereby obtained a crown of 
honour, O (name), most venerable father; wherefore we in faith have recourse to thy 
protection and cry aloud to thee; From enemies visible and invisible do thou deliver 
us, for thou hast trampled the serpent underfoot. 
ODE VII  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant to 
cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Separating thy mind from sympathy for carnal things, O blessed one, and 
consumed with the fire of asceticism, thou, O wise one, didst chant the hymn of the 
children: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
By the mere invocation of thy name, evil spirits are driven away, for they have 
come to know thee, O venerable one, as an ascetic and martyr of Christ, who dost 
fervently chant: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Thine end was announced to thee, O most blessed (name), by the all-
accomplishing will; wherefore didst thou give thyself over to yet greater fasting, and 
ascending from glory to glory thou wast slain for the sake of Christ, the God of all. 
Theotokion: Raise me up who am humbled by despondency, that I may do God’s 
works, O most pure one, strengthening me against the enemies that ever assail me, 
seducing me with contrary thoughts. 
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn the 
sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, dost do all 
as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Adorned with the virtues of fasting, and tormented with the pangs of wounds, O 
most glorious one, thou hast appeared before the Bestower of victories and obtained 
from Him the honors of victory. 
Kindled by love of the Almighty, O most glorious (name), thou hast laid low the 
haughty enemy, and through thy desire for God, thou hast been granted to be His 
abode throughout the ages. 
Deem me worthy of God’s mercy, O godly-blessed martyr, and deliver me from 
temptations and calamities, O venerable one (name), for honoring thee I have 
recourse to thy protection. 
Theotokion: Rejoice! O holy mountain, through which God hath passed; Rejoice! 
manifestation of the sacred mysteries, awesome tidings, and the revelation of things 
unseen; Rejoice! O Virgin, the restoration of the fallen. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
O godly wise father (name), thou hast attained unto the uttermost beauty and 
sweetness, and standing now before God dost hymn with the immaterial hosts: Holy, 
Holy, Holy art Thou, O all-accomplishing and all-powerful Trinity. 
Having escaped the snares of thy tyrants O venerable one (name), thou, hast 
found rest in the heavenly abodes and having joined the ranks of the martyrs; do thou 
now, together with the immaterial hosts, pray for us, that we all may glorify thee. 
Placing Christ, thy strength and power, before the ferocious attacks of demons 
thou didst easily repel them, and attain to refuge in the highest, being thoroughly 
adorned and richly resplendent with the effulgence of the divine light. 
Theotokion: Unable to comprehend the incomprehensible wonder of thy 
birthgiving, O Virgin Mother of God, but rather glorifying it silently, we exceedingly 
praise thee, O most blessed and immaculate one, who alone among women art 
supremely good. 
Exapostilarion in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Hearken, O ye women ...”: 
Having been well proved; first by suffering, and then by thine accomplished and 
divine eremitic life, thou didst ascend into heaven, and standing now before Christ; 
do thou, O venerable father (name), fervently intercede on behalf of us who hymn 
thee. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Having given birth unto the Lord, the ineffable Joy, do thou make all 
who honour thee, to be participants of heavenly joy, O most pure and truly graced 
one, for they cry out to thee: “Forsake not thy servants, O blessed Mary.” 
On the Praises, these Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Having dyed thy sacred vesture in the purple of thy martyric blood, thou hast 
worthily entered into the Holy of Holies, wherein divine glory and ineffable Light 
doth shine, wherein is heard the voices of those feasting; wherein also thou hast 
obtained the reward of thy labors; thy victory as a martyr, the never-fading crown, 
right worthy praise, and ever abiding life in paradise. Do thou, O most wise (name), 
with boldness intercede for our souls. (Twice) 
The tempest of torments did cause thy soul to waiver, neither could long 
imprisonment in a dark dungeon hide thee, O glorious martyr; but rather, shining 
forth as light unto those in the gloomy darkness of vanity, thou didst reveal them to 
be the sons of day through the laver of baptism, the great and saving birth into divine 
life, as a God-pleasing martyr, O most wise (name). 
Who can worthily testify to the victories of thy virtues? Whose mouth can 
adequately describe thy torments and endurance ? For in both hast thou been pleasing 
to Christ, O (name). And now, O venerable martyr, since thou hast great boldness, 
cease not to pray that our souls may be saved. 
Glory ..., in Tone II:  
O come, let us crown with hymns the sufferer of Christ; as a lily of the field, and a 
divine flower of paradise; as a sheep of the orthodox flock, as the most comely purity 
and confirmation of the faith, the glory of fasters, as one manifestly revealed to the 
world; as one who hath obtained a never-fading diadem. 
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
All my hope I place in thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy protection.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the ripe Cluster, * Whom thou didst bear in 
thy womb without being tilled, * hanging upon the Tree, O pure one, * thou didst 
exclaim lamenting and crying aloud: * “I beseech Thee O my Child, * pour forth that 
sweetness * by which the drunkenness of the passions is taken away, * for my sake, O 
Benefactor, ** who didst bear Thee in Thy tender compassion! 
The great Doxology: If a small Doxology is read, the following is chanted after 
the Aposticha: 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
O venerable martyr (name), with the help of the Spirit * thou didst vanquish the 
embittered enemy, * and as an invincible warrior, * thou didst slay the noetic 
Ethiopians * with the weapon of the faith, * and having lawfully completed thine 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ascetic endeavors, * thou hast been crowned together with all the choirs of the 
martyrs, ** O most noetically rich and venerable martyr. 
Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Theotokion: Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who 
hast given birth to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O 
thou who alone art the intercessor for our souls!  
After Our Father ..., the Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable (name).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
O venerable father, fortified by God’s strength, thou, O most blessed spiritual 
athlete, didst undertake the endurance of afflictions and torments from the tyrants. 
(Twice) 
The greatest of strugglers, even Christ, endowed thee with strength to destroy 
deception, and to put to shame the enemy, who impudently boasted, everywhere 
raging in vain. 
Beautiful appear thy feet, O venerable one, traversing joyfully the path of 
martyrdom, covering the heads of the wicked with shame, O great sufferer (name). 
Steered by the life-creating arm, thou didst sit upon the waters and remain 
unharmed, O our father, but the commands of the persecutor were drowned therein 
by thine ardent prayer, O all-sacred one. 
By small things thou didst effect great things, for having given thyself up to mar-
tyrdom O godly venerable one, by the spirit thou hast slain the serpent, the seducer 
of Eve. 
Unable to bear the power of thy discourse, the flattering begetter of evil savagely 
gave thee over to chains, wounds and a violent death, O (name).  
Theotokion: Behold, the Lord hath now assumed flesh from thy pure blood, O 
Virgin Theotokos, uniting Himself to mankind in an supra-natural manner, bringing 
about our salvation through His unspeakable mercy. 
The Troparion and Kontakion from the Typicon, but if there be none, chant the 
following:  
Troparion of the venerable martyr, in Tone VIII:  
In thee, O father, the image of God was preserved, * for taking up thy cross, thou 
didst follow after Christ; * by activity thou didst learn to disdain the flesh, as 
something transient, * but to care for thy soul as something immortal. ** Wherefore, 
with the angels thy spirit doth rejoice, O venerable (name).  
Kontakion of the venerable martyr, in Tone II:  
As a pious and capable faster, * as an all-honored and willing martyr, * and as one 
who led an eremitic life in the desert, * let us worthily extol in hymns the ever-lauded 
(name), ** for he hath trampled the serpent underfoot. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: The saints shall boast in glory * and they shall 
rejoice upon their beds. 
Verse: Sing unto the Lord a new song, His praise is in the Church of His 
saints?. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
THE 2nd EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO TIMOTHY (1: 8-17) 
My child Timothy: be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his 
prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power 
of God; Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our 
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ 
Jesus before the world began, But is now made manifest by the appearing of our 
Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality 
to light through the gospel: Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, 
and a teacher of the Gentiles. For the which cause I also suffer these things: 
nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded 
that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day. Hold 
fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is 
in Christ Jesus. That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy 
Ghost which dwelleth in us. This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be 
turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. The Lord give mercy 
unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my 
chain: But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. 
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how 
many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well. 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His 
commandments shall he greatly delight. 
Verse: His seed shall be mighty upon the earth; the generation of the upright 
shall be blessed.  
 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (10:32,33,37-38; 19 27-30) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: Whosoever therefore shall confess me before 
men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever 
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. 
He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that 
loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that taketh not his 
cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. Then answered Peter and said 
unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have 
therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his 
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And 
every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or 
wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall 
inherit everlasting life. But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
