--- PAGE 1 ---
THE GENERAL VIGIL SERVICE TO TWO OR MORE NUNS. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Like effulgent beams of light from the heights, * ye enlighten the world with your 
noetic rays, * driving away the gloom * of the hordes of evil demons; * wherefore we 
celebrate ** your light-bearing and divine festival. 
O all-honored ones, having beheld the beauties of paradise, * and been 
abundantly filled therewith, * ye, have blossomed forth upon the world * like never-
fading blooms of godly-understanding; * partaking thereof today with spiritual love, 
** we are satiated with all things good for the soul. 
Ye have been adorned with your life of struggles * and like the sun having 
radiated upon all, * in the plenitude of ascetic deeds, * ye have thereby being glorified 
in them, O most honored ones, * taking delight in divine glory ** and praying that we 
all be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I: 
Tempest-tossed on the abyss of transgressions, * fleeing to the calm haven * of 
thy most pure supplication, * I cry out to thee, O Birthgiver of God: ** Save me, O 
all-immaculate one, extending thy mighty right hand unto thy servant!  
Stavrotheotokion: Of old, when thou didst behold thy Son and Master stretching 
forth His hands upon the Cross, His side pierced by the spear, О pure Mother, thou 
didst cry out, lamenting: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou sufferest, ridding men of 
their suffering, О Lover of mankind?” 
If an Idiomelon be appointed, Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
With the outpouring of tears * ye extinguished the fire of the passions of the 
flesh, * and having kindled the desire for things divine * and the love of Christ the 
King, * ye were dispassionately united to Him; * wherefore, having entered now into 
the noetic palaces, * intercede for those who honour you, ** before the Benefactor. 
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, chant 
the following Dogmatic in Tone II (If the service is a Resurrection service 
chant the Dogmatic in the Tone for that service ): 
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Otherwise, Theotokion: O Sovereign lady, * accept the supplications of thy 
servants, ** and deliver us from all want and grief. 
The Entrance. The Prokeimenon of the day. The Three Lessons, if appointed. 
THE READING IS FROM ISAIAH  
Thus saith the Lord: Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people 
be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them 
bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: 
that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was 
no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the LORD; and beside 
me there is no savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there 
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, that I 
am God. Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of 
my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the LORD, your Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all 
their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships. Thus saith the Lord. The 
Holy One of Israel 
THE READING IS FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect.  
THE READING IS FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous man if he happen to die early shall be at rest, and the dying 
righteous man shall bring judgment unto the wicked living, for they will see the end 
of the righteous one and will not understand what is destined for him. And the Lord 
will hurl the wicked down voiceless and will remove them from their foundations, 
and they shall pass away unto the last in sorrow and their memory shall vanish, for 
they shall come in dread unto the realization of their sins, and their transgressions 
shall convict them to their faces. Then the righteous man will stand up in great 

--- PAGE 3 ---
boldness before those who offended him and despised his works. At the sight of him 
they will be disturbed with great fear and will feel astonished at his glorious salvation; 
for, repenting and sighing from the oppression of the spirit, they shall speak within 
themselves, saying: this is he whom we laughed at and held in scorn; we were so 
foolish as to account his life as madness and his end dishonorable; how, then, is he 
now numbered unto the sons of God and his lot is cast among the holy? We have 
therefore wandered away from the right path, and the light of truth bath not 
illumined us, and the sun hath not shone unto us; we were full of the wicked ways 
and perdition, and walked in the unpassable paths, but did not comprehend God’s 
ways.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”:  
Having proceeded along the narrow path * that leadeth unto life, * ye preserved 
tranquility of spirit along the way, * for being fasters, and the glory of the venerable, * 
ye mightily overcame the snares of demons; * wherefore ye were deemed worthy to 
inherit the heavenly Kingdom * and now enjoying the delights thereof ** ye behold 
the never waning beauty therein. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Your most splendid life astonished the angels * and clearly frightened the raging 
demons; * brightly adorning the gatherings of the faithful, * enjoining them to ever 
continue along the path * that leadeth to the heavenly habitations of Christ; * Him do 
ye beseech * that those who in faith celebrate your all-honored memory, ** be 
delivered from corruption and misfortunes. 
Verse: Precious in the sight of the Lord * is the death of His saints. 
Offering daily hymns and praise to Christ, * while dwelling in the desert O 
venerable ones, * ye gave your souls and thoughts * entirely to God alone, * and like 
the great Moses, * entered intractable regions; * wherefore ye obtained victory over 
the invisible enemy ** and become pure receptacles of the divine Spirit. 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Having loved the Lord and Bridegroom, * and in obedience to His teaching, * the 
maidens disdained bodily weakness, * and with a pious and fervent spirit, * subdued 
their passions, * and were thereby led into the heavenly palace, ** ever rejoicing with 
ye the venerable. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O thou inextinguishable lamp, * and throne of righteousness * most pure 
Sovereign Lady: ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Stavrotheotokion: “Lament not for Me, O Mother, * beholding Me thy Son and 
God hanging upon the Tree, * Who hath suspended the earth upon the waters 
unsupported, * and hath fashioned all creation; * for I shall arise and be glorified, * 
and shall crush the kingdoms of Hades with strength; * destroying its power * and 
delivering those in bondage * from its wickedness, * for I am compassionate; * and I 
shall bring them to My Father, ** in that I am the Lover of mankind.”  
The Troparion from the Typicon; but, if there be none, chant this: 
Troparion of the venerable mothers, in Tone II:  
O ye who are beautiful in soul and glorious in Christ, * having betrothed 
yourselves to the true desire, * and spurned the betrothal of temporal bridegrooms, * 
ye attained maturity in deeds of virtue, * and were thereby raised to the heights of 
incorruption, * abounding in riches, ye became the pillars and rule for monastic 
women. ** Wherefore cease ye never to pray for us who with love celebrate your 
memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VIII:  
O ye who are beautiful in soul and glorious in Christ, * having betrothed 
yourselves to the true desire, * and spurned the betrothal of temporal bridegrooms, * 
ye attained maturity in deeds of virtue, * and were thereby raised to the heights of 
incorruption, * abounding in riches, ye became the pillars and rule for monastic 
women. ** Wherefore cease ye never to pray for us who with love celebrate your 
memory. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”:  
Ye forsook the beauty of this world, O venerable ones, * having exchanged 
perishable riches * for those that never pass away * and are manifestly ever present; * 
wherefore we glorify you, together with all the saints, * and celebrate your sacred 
memory, * asking that by your intercessions, * O blessed ones, ** we may obtain 
great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God wrought 
in thee, O divinely joyous sovereign Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One, 
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood. Him 
do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go thou quickly before ...”:  
Having adorned your life with abstinence, * and mortified the passions of the 
flesh, * ye obtained victory over the assaults of the enemy, * O venerable ones; * 
appearing as both desert dwellers, * and rational beacons shining in the world; * 
wherefore, O ye blessed ones, ** entreat the Lord to have mercy on our souls. 
(Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Finding thee to be a haven, a bulwark, a refuge, our hope, protection and fervent 
help, we, the faithful, hasten to thee and cry out earnestly, exclaiming with faith: Have 
mercy upon those who place their trust in thee, O Theotokos, and deliver us from 
transgressions.  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We bless you, O Venerable Mothers 
(name), and we honor your holy memory, Instructors of Nuns, and conversers 
with the angels. 
Verse: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive 
unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “That which was mystically commanded ...”: 
Keeping vigil in secret prayers * and finding delight in God inspired writings, O 
blessed ones, * ye took upon your shoulders the cross of the Lord, * and following 
Him in abstinence, * ye trampled down the deceit of the serpent, * crying out unto 
Christ: ** O heavenly Bridegroom, be Thou our foundation. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
If of Polyeleos rank, and not a Resurrection Service, chant the following:  
The Song of Ascents: The first antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In the Congregations bless ye God, the Lord, from the wellsprings of 
Israel. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (25, 1-13) 
The Lord spake a parable saying: Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened 
unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. 
And five of them were wise, and five were foolish. They that (were) foolish took their 
lamps, and took no oil with them: But the wise took oil in their vessels with their 
lamps. While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight 
there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Then 
all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, 
Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, Not 
so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy 
for yourselves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also 
the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I 
say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the 
hour wherein the Son of man cometh. 
After the 50th Psalm: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the venerable mothers (name), * O Merciful One, ** blot 
out the multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ...,  
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Then the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
With the outpouring of tears * ye extinguished the fire of the passions of the 
flesh, * and having kindled the desire for things divine * and the love of Christ the 
King, * ye were dispassionately united to Him; * wherefore, having entered now into 
the noetic palaces, * intercede for those who honour you, ** before the Benefactor. 
The Canon, in Tone VIII:  
ODE I 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned Pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Refrain: Venerable mothers (names) pray to God for us 
In bodily weakness, O venerable mothers, ye humbled the powerful enemy and 
untied yourselves to God, entreat Him to grant strength unto us all. 
Awestruck by the comeliness of the Bridegroom and following Him in accordance 
with the psalmist, ye followed in His life-bearing footsteps, whereby ye humbled the 
wicked serpent. 
O venerable ones, ye adorned your souls by withering the fairness of your bodies 
with labors of abstinence; and have now, together with Christ the Bridegroom, 
entered the splendid chambers. 
Theotokion: Thy womb, O Virgin, was shown to be a splendid receptacle for the 
merciful Lord, Who became incarnate from thee, illumining all things with the rays of 
the knowledge of God. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, * 
do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of the 
faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
O most honored ones, despising the fairness of the body, ye counted transitory 
glory to be but a dream, and with humility and watchfulness, sought and found God, 
O ye godly blessed ones. 
The sacred relics of the venerable ones radiate cures unto those who approach 
them with faith, for they draw forth healing from the wellspring of grace, the Savior, 
Whose voluntary passion they emulated. 
Having rejected the world and fleshly wisdom, and by the pangs of abstinence, 
acquired Christ the most pure Bridegroom, ye were granted to rejoice in the divine 
heavenly palaces. 
Theotokion: The sacred clarions of the holy prophets of old, announced 
beforehand, O most pure Virgin, that thou wouldst give birth unto the Light, as the 
living book in which the Word, transcending speech, was written without hands. 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Having 
taken 
upon 
your 
shoulders 
the 
cross 
of 
Christ, 
* 
O all-splendid and venerable ones, * ye have faithfully followed Him in your ascetic 
endeavors * and been manifest as the rule of women monastics; * and having now 
inherited the Kingdom on high * by your divine labors, ** unceasingly pray that our 
souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The Word of the Father, Christ our God, * Who was incarnate of thee, * we have 
come to know, O Virgin Theotokos, * who alone art pure, who alone art blessed. ** 
Wherefore, we unceasingly hymn and magnify thee.  
Stavrotheotokion: She who in latter times gave birth to Thee in the flesh, * O 
Christ Who wast begotten of the beginningless Father, * when she saw Thee hanging 
upon the Cross, cried out: * “Woe is me, O Jesus most beloved! * How is it that 
Thou Who art worshipped as God by the angels, * art now crucified by iniquitous 
men? ** I hymn Thee, O Long-suffering One!”  
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Having withered the beauty of the body by asceticism, the holy women behold 
now the most pure beauty of their beloved Bridegroom. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having put off sleep from the eyelids of your souls, O sacred women, ye have put 
to sleep the needs of your bodies through abstinence. 
Your radiant festival, beaming with the light of the Divine Spirit, doth illumine 
the souls of us who in faith honour you, O venerable ones. 
Theotokion: Having conceived abiding love for Thee, O Lord, Who assumed 
flesh from the most pure Virgin, and moved by divine love, the venerable woman 
followed in the fragrant wake of Thy myrrh. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Dispelling the fog of all sicknesses by the power of the Holy Spirit, O all-honored 
ones, by the most glorious effulgence of your miracles, ye turn the faithful towards 
the light of the heavenly Kingdom. 
Having died to the world, and been blessed by God, ye have inherited immortal 
life and been deemed worthy of the divine bridal chambers, O all-honored ones, since 
ye preserved your lamps un-extinguished, with the oil of your ascetic struggles. 
Neglecting quickly waning and corruptible life, and being blessed by God, ye 
abandoned it to those remaining on earth, for having bound yourselves with spiritual 
love, ye now dwell in the habitations of the righteous. 
Theotokion: God the Word, Who preserved thee a Virgin, O thou who knewest 
not wedlock, voluntarily made His abode within the womb, and was seen as a man, O 
most pure one; and desiring Him, the maidens followed Him by the asceticism of 
their splendid life. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I proclaim 
my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto Hades hath drawn 
nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up from corruption, O 
God. 
Abstinent and humble of heart, watchful and merciful, understanding in the faith 
and full of perfect love, O sacred women, ye became temples of God and a source of 
inexhaustible healings. 
O honored ones, ye spurned the sweet things of life, and endured the pangs of 
asceticism for the sake of Him Who descended to earth and for our sake lived 
without a dwelling-place; wherefore, O right wondrous ones, ye have found a 
hospitable dwelling-place in the Heavens. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O all-honored ones, with many vigils ye lulled to sleep the soul-corrupting 
passions, and now worthily rest with the righteous, making intercession for the world. 
Theotokion: I know thee, O Virgin, to be an intercessor and powerful protector, 
driving away the temptations, and extinguishing the assaults of the demons; 
wherefore I ever beseech thee, deliver me from the corruption of my passions. 
The Kontakion from the Typicon; if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion of the venerable mothers, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having received the grace ...”:  
Having emaciated your bodies by fasting, * and with ceaseless prayers entreated 
the Creator, * that ye might obtain * the forgiveness of your sins, * which ye received 
from God, * attaining thereby the Kingdom of heaven; ** intercede before Christ 
God for us all. 
Ikos: O God, Thou Who dost close and open the abyss, bringing water up into 
the clouds, and sending rain to water the face of the earth. Grant also my barren soul, 
and open mine unworthy mouth, and my stuttering tongue, that I may utter worthy 
words, and hymn Thy venerable ones, whom Thou Thyself hast glorified, in so far as 
they despised the sweet things of this world, and for Thy sake emaciated their bodies; 
that by Thy might they might vanquish the devil, wherefore they received from Thee 
crowns of endurance; and now, standing before Thee in the heavens with all the 
saints, they unceasingly intercede for us all. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the Trinity, 
* as they sang: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
By love, the venerable ones transformed perishable glory into incorruptible glory, 
and delighting, rejoicing, and exulting therein, they chant: “O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou.” 
Ye have been revealed to be multi-lustrous stars, illumining the souls of the 
faithful with the light of your labors, and teaching them to chant: “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Ye have been revealed to be like a river of healings, drowning the sea of sufferings 
and saving those who chant: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Theotokion: Release my wretched soul from the bonds of sin and unite it with the 
perfect love of God, O Birthgiver of God, that I may glorify thee in faith and hymn 
thee throughout the ages. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant and 
the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore they cried 
aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 11 ---
The virgins subjected the irrational passions to the mind and noetically united 
with the Bridegroom and Word, chant: “Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.” 
Having been crucified unto the world and pierced with divine love, the sacred 
virgins wounded with the arrows of abstinence, him who wounded Eve through the 
tasting of the bitter fruit, hymning Christ throughout the ages. 
O venerable ones, ye subjected the irrational lusts to reason, and blamelessly 
betrothed yourselves, O honored ones, to the Bridegroom and Word, chanting: 
“Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages.” 
Theotokion: Having from thy pure blood given birth to Jesus in the flesh, O most 
pure Virgin Mother, thou didst gather together all the virgins and cry aloud with 
them: “Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
the ages.” 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do we 
magnify. 
O ye beautiful and divinely speaking turtle-doves and splendid and pure swallows, 
ye were brought into the heavenly palaces unto the all-comely Master. 
Numbered with the choirs on high, ye have made your abode among the 
assemblies of the elect, ever entreating the compassionate and loving God on our 
behalf. 
The memory of the venerable women hath shone forth throughout the world, 
enlightening the thoughts of the faithful who ever magnify Christ. 
Theotokion: Being the receptacle of the Light, O Virgin, enlighten my soul, 
darkened by the passions, that I may be delivered from the outer darkness by thine 
intercessions. 
Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
O 
venerable 
and 
all-honored 
ones, 
by 
your 
supplications 
unto 
God, deliver from every evil circumstance those who with love and gratitude 
celebrate your memory, and cleanse the defilement of my soul, despite the little I have 
hymned you. 
Theotokion: Cease not, O Virgin, to intercede for us to thy Son and God, the 
Lover of mankind; for in thee we have placed our hope, and by thine entreaties we 
who glorify thee in faith, obtain deliverance from every evil circumstance, suffering, 
transgression, and infirmity. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
On the Praises, these Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Having preserved your virginity inviolate O venerable ones, and led an unspotted 
and pure life, ye obtained spiritual riches, fulfilling the law of Christ, Whom you 
followed, leaving the earth and everything that is therein; wherefore Jesus, the Lover 
of mankind and Savior of our souls, hath granted you heavenly riches and the 
kingdom of heaven. (Twice). 
As lovers of spiritual wisdom, ye revealed within yourselves the active and 
immortal aspects of the soul; whereby ye strove to spurn the bonds of the flesh and 
remain free from every pollution of sin and from every impurity, that without spot or 
wrinkle, O ye god-pleasing women, ye may stand before your Bridegroom pure and 
undefiled. 
Your radiant countenances were effulgently illumined upon your repose, O all-
famed ones, for Christ glorified you as His godly-spoken, holy, compassionate, and 
venerable ones; having lived on earth the life of angels, and pleased God with the 
splendor of your life. 
Glory ..., Tone I:  
Through abstinence and labors ye laid aside all fleshly cares, O ye venerable ones, 
and hastening up to the heavenly habitations, ye now enjoy the ineffable goodness 
beloved by you. 
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I: 
Rejoice, O holy Virgin Theotokos * who art one of us, * thou pure vessel of all 
the world, * inextinguishable lamp, * dwelling-place of the Boundless One, * 
indestructible temple! * Rejoice, thou from whom the Lamb of God was born, ** 
who taketh away the sins of all the world.  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb * lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  
The great Doxology: If a small Doxology is read, and a Doxasticon is 
appointed, the following is chanted after the Aposticha: 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Having loved the Lord and Bridegroom, * and in obedience to His teaching, * the 
maidens disdained bodily weakness, * and with a pious and fervent spirit, * subdued 
their passions, * and were thereby led into the heavenly palace, ** ever rejoicing with 
ye the venerable. 
Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
After Our Father ..., the Troparion of the venerable mothers, in Tone II:  
O ye who are beautiful in soul and glorious in Christ, * having betrothed 
yourselves to the true desire, * and spurned the betrothal of temporal bridegrooms, * 
ye attained maturity in deeds of virtue, * and were thereby raised to the heights of 
incorruption, * abounding in riches, ye became the pillars and rule for monastic 
women. ** Wherefore cease ye never to pray for us who with love celebrate your 
memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion or Stavrotheotokion: 
The Dismissal: 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
O most honored ones, despising the fairness of the body, ye counted transitory 
glory to be but a dream, and with humility and watchfulness, sought and found God, 
O ye godly blessed ones. 
The sacred relics of the venerable ones radiate cures unto those who approach 
them with faith, for they draw forth healing from the wellspring of grace, the Savior, 
Whose voluntary passion they emulated. 
Having rejected the world and fleshly wisdom, and by the pangs of abstinence, 
acquired Christ the most pure Bridegroom, ye were granted to rejoice in the divine 
heavenly palaces. 
Abstinent and humble of heart, watchful and merciful, understanding in the faith 
and full of perfect love, O sacred women, ye became temples of God and a source of 
inexhaustible healings. 
O honored ones, ye spurned the sweet things of life, and endured the pangs of 
asceticism for the sake of Him Who descended to earth and for our sake lived 
without a dwelling-place; wherefore, O right wondrous ones, ye have found a 
hospitable dwelling-place in the Heavens. 
O all-honored ones, with many vigils ye lulled to sleep the soul-corrupting 
passions, and now worthily rest with the righteous, making intercession for the world. 
Theotokion: I know thee, O Virgin, to be an intercessor and powerful protector, 
driving away the temptations, and extinguishing the assaults of the demons; 
wherefore I ever beseech thee, deliver me from the corruption of my passions. 
 The Troparion and Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none chant the 
following: 
Troparion of the venerable mothers, in Tone II:  
O ye who are beautiful in soul and glorious in Christ, * having betrothed 
yourselves to the true desire, * and spurned the betrothal of temporal bridegrooms, * 
ye attained maturity in deeds of virtue, * and were thereby raised to the heights of 
incorruption, * abounding in riches, ye became the pillars and rule for monastic 
women. ** Wherefore cease ye never to pray for us who with love celebrate your 
memory. 
Kontakion of the venerable mothers, in Tone II:  
Having emaciated your bodies by fasting, * and with ceaseless prayers entreated 
the Creator, * that ye might obtain * the forgiveness of your sins, * which ye received 
from God, * attaining thereby the Kingdom of heaven; ** intercede before Christ 
God for us all. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel.  
Verse: In the Congregations bless ye God, the Lord, from the wellsprings of 
Israel. 
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (GAL. 3:23-29) 
Brethren: But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the 
faith which should afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster 
to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is 
come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by 
faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put 
on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is 
neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s, then 
are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was attentive unto 
me, * and hearkened unto my supplication. 
Verse: And he brought me out of the pit of misery, out of the mire of clay. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE: (7:36-50) 
At that time: one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he 
went into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat. And, behold, a woman in the 
city, which was a sinner, when she knew that (Jesus) sat at meat in the Pharisee’s 
house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, And stood at his feet behind (him) 
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe (them) with the hairs of 
her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed (them) with the ointment. Now when the 
Pharisee which had bidden him saw (it), he spake within himself, saying, This man, if 
he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman (this is) that 
toucheth him: for she is a sinner. And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have 
somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on. There was a certain creditor 
which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And 
when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, 
which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that (he), to 
whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. And he 
turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into 
thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with 
tears, and wiped (them) with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest me no kiss: but this 
woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil 
thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment. 
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved 

--- PAGE 16 ---
much: but to whom little is forgiven, (the same) loveth little. And he said unto her, 
Thy sins are forgiven. And they that sat at meat with him began to say within 
themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said to the woman, Thy faith 
hath saved thee; go in peace. 
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; He 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 
 
