--- PAGE 1 ---
GENERAL VIGIL SERVICE TO  
THE UNMERCENARIES AND WONDER-WORKERS. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the Stichera, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”:  
Like rivers filled to overflowing with spiritual water, * ye water creation with the 
knowledge of God * and with the preeminent gift of healing, * ye dry up the soul-
destroying passions, * healing maladies and driving away evil spirits, * O God-bearing 
unmercenaries (names), ** fervent intercessors for our souls.  
Having subdued the irrational passions * by the strength of your souls, O holy 
ones, * you were enriched by Christ with the gift of healing, * and ye now grant 
healing to both men and beasts, * wherefore celebrating your sacred and radiant 
memory, ** we entreat you to heal our souls.  
Your holy temple appeareth like a resplendent and salvific heaven, * shining forth 
like the sun with divine healings, * the multitude of miracles worked therein shining 
like stars in the firmament of the heavens, * O most blessed (names), ** ministers of 
the Lord and fervent intercessors for our souls.  
If an Idiomelon be appointed, Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Who cannot wonder at, * and who cannot glorify and faithfully hymn the miracles 
* of the wise and most glorious unmercenaries? * For after their holy repose they 
grant abundant healing * for all who with faith have recourse unto them, * and unto 
their honored and holy relics, * from which the grace of abundant cures poureth 
forth. * O holy twain! * O the wisdom and glory of the grace granted you by God! * 
Wherefore we cry unto the Benefactor in spiritual songs, * to God Who hath revealed 
unto us the holy unmercinaries ** for the healing of our souls and bodies.  
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, and not a Resurrection Service, sing the 
following Dogmatic in Tone VIII (If the service is a Resurrection service sing the 
Dogmatic of the Tone for that service ): 
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
Otherwise, Theotokion: Rejoice, thou praise of the universe! * Rejoice, temple of 
the Lord! * Rejoice, mountain overshadowed! * Rejoice, refuge of all! * Rejoice, 
golden candlestick! * Rejoice, honored glory of the Orthodox! * Rejoice, Mary, 
Mother of Christ God! * Rejoice, paradise! Rejoice, divine table! * Rejoice, tabernacle! 
Rejoice, golden jar! ** Rejoice, thou hope of all!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Stavrotheotokion. The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly 
nailed to the Tree, * cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my most 
beloved Child! * How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, * 
desiring to leave me childless and bereft of Thee, ** my most beloved Child?”  
The Entrance. The Prokeimenon of the day. The Three Lessons, if appointed: 
THE READING IS FROM ISAIAH (43, 9-14; ) 
Thus saith the Lord: Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people 
be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them 
bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: our let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: 
that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was 
no God formed, neither shall there be after me. I, even I, am the LORD; and beside 
me there is no savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there 
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, that I 
am God. Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of 
my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the LORD, your Redeemer, the 
Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all 
their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships. Thus saith the Lord. The 
Holy One of Israel 
THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3, 1-9). 
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction, but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded, for 
God proved them and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
for ever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth; and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him; for grace and mercy is to His saints and 
visitation for His elect.  
THE READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (4, 7-15.) 
Though the righteous man happen to die, yet shall he rest in peace. For honorable 
age is not that which is so for a length of time, nor that which is measured by the 
number of years. But wisdom and a spotless life to a ripe old age is the true gray hair 
of a man. He pleased God, and was beloved of Him, so that living among sinners he 
was taken away. Yea, speedily was he taken up, lest wickedness should pervert his 

--- PAGE 3 ---
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. For the beguilement of transgression doth 
obscure things that are good, and the wanderings of lust doth undermine the 
innocent mind. Made perfect in a short time, he fulfilled many years; for his soul 
pleased the Lord; therefore the Lord hastened to take him away from among the 
wicked. This the people saw, and did not understand, neither did they lay this up in 
their hearts, that grace and mercy is with His saints, and that the Lord doth visit His 
chosen ones. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the heavenly orders ...”:  
With the rays of your miracles * O holy unmercenaries, * like most brilliant lamps 
rendering the whole universe resplendent, * ye were deemed worthy to inherit heaven 
through grace, * set forth like radiant stars * on account of the virtuousness of your 
holy lives. 
Verse: In the saints that are in His earth, hath the Lord been wondrous, * He 
hath wrought all His desires in them.  
Abounding in richly-flowing miracles of grace, * O Martyrs of the Lord, * ye 
appear as clouds rendering gentle rains, * with which you spiritually refresh all the 
earth * encouraging the faithful * to bring unto God praises of Orthodoxy.  
Verse: Behold now, what is so good or so joyous * as for brethren to dwell 
together in unity.  
Having truly received from God the art of healing pangs * of both soul and body, 
* O Martyrs of the Lord, * you heal, not by the treatments of worldly medicine, * but 
by supra-natural divine inspiration.  
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Possessing within yourselves the Source of healings, * O holy unmercenaries 
(name), * you grant cures unto all who seek them, * since you were made worthy of 
the greatest of gifts from Christ the Savior, * the ever-flowing Source of spiritual gifts, 
* for the Lord hath said unto you, as emulators of the Apostles: * “Behold I give you 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, * and to heal all manner of sickness 
and all manner of disease.” * Wherefore having lived according to His 
commandments, * freely ye have received, freely have ye given * by curing the 
maladies of our souls and bodies.  
If the Celebration be with a Polyeleos, sing the Theotokion of the Resurrection: 
Mercifully regard the supplications of thy servants, * O most immaculate one, * 
quelling the cruel uprisings of the demons against us, * delivering us from every 
sorrow; * for thee alone do we have as a steadfast and sure confirmation, * and 
having acquired thine intercession; * let not us who call upon thee be put to shame, * 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O Sovereign Lady. * Hasten thou to answer the entreaties of those who cry out to 
thee with faith: * Rejoice, thou help, joy and protection of all, ** and the salvation of 
our souls! 
Otherwise, Theotokion: O Theotokos, Queen of all, * thou praise of the 
Orthodox: * cast down the proud arrogance of the heretics, * and put to shame the 
countenances of those * who neither bow down before nor honor thy precious 
image, ** O most pure one.  
Stavrotheotokion: Seeing Christ, the Lover of mankind, * crucified and with His 
side pierced with a lance, * the most pure one lamented, crying aloud: * “What is this, 
O my Son ? * What have the ungrateful people rendered unto Thee * in return for all 
the good things Thou hast rendered unto them ?” * And yet thou dost show thy 
tender compassion for me, * that I may endure my childlessness. ** I stand in awe, O 
Compassionate One, of Thy voluntary crucifixion. 
The Troparion from the Typicon, but if there be no Typicon, sing the following: 
Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
O Holy and unmercenary wonderworkers, visit our infirmities. ** Freely ye have 
received, freely give. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
AT MATINS 
At the Matins, for God is the Lord, the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
O Holy and unmercenary wonderworkers, visit our infirmities. ** Freely ye have 
received, freely give. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st Kathisma, the Sessional Hymn: in Tone II:  
Made worthy of great gifts, O glorious ones, * ye lived a humble life on earth, * 
wandering far and wide unselfishly curing the sick * of their infirmities and their 
pangs. * Now that ye have been revealed as friends of the Angels, * O faithful 
(names), * by your intercessions * heal also our sufferings. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
As thou art a well-spring of loving compassion, O Theotokos, * grant mercy unto 
us. * Look upon us a sinful people, * and ever show forth thy power; * for, trusting in 
thee, we cry out to thee, Rejoice! ** as once did Gabriel, the supreme commander of 
the bodiless hosts.  
After the 2nd Kathisma, The Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Martyrs of Christ (names), * intercede on behalf of us who come to you in faith, * 
for as protectors of our lives * and through your intercessions, * the grace of healing 
is granted * and many an infirmity are driven away. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone I: 
O most pure Theotokos, * thou who art blessed in the heavens * and glorified 
upon the earth ** Rejoice, thou Bride unwedded!  
After the Polyeleos, the Megalynarion: We magnify you, O glorious wonder-
workers (names), and honor your precious sufferings which ye have endured 
for Christ.  
Verse: Our God is our refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which 
mightily befall us. 
After the Polyeleos, the Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The Co-beginningless Word ...”:  
The feast of the Martyrs (names), * brightly shineth forth today, * for they dwell 
in the heavenly and divine light; * the choir of Angels extolleth, * and the race of 
mankind rejoiceth; * for the holy ones ever intercede on behalf of our souls. (Twice)  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone V: 
The mystery of the wondrous Virgin * hath been revealed to the world as one of 
salvation, * for from her was born jubilation; * O Lord, glory be to Thee.  
If not a Resurrection Service, Sing the following:  
The Songs of Ascent: in Tone IV, First Antiphon: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire ** 
shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is exalted 
** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
The Prokeimenon: In the saints that are in His earth, hath the Lord been 
wondrous, * He hath wrought all His desires in them. 
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand that I 
might not be shaken. 
Let every breath.  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (9: 36-38; 10: 5-8) 
At that time, when Jesus: saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on 
them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd. 
Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are 
few; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his 
harvest. And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power 
against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all 
manner of disease. Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these; The first, Simon, 
who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his 
brother; Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James the son 
of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus; Simon the Canaanite, 
and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and 
commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of 
the Samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 
And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, 
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give. 
After the 50th Psalm: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Holy Unmercinaries (names), * O Merciful One, ** 
blot out the multitude of our transgressions. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ...,  
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Then the Sessional Hymn: in Tone I:  
The resplendent, holy, and beauteous, * all-festive celebration of the Martyrs 
(names), * illumineth the whole of creation, * driving away the darkness of sin, * 
shedding the grace of healing upon all. 
The Canon, in Tone VIII,  
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * Who 
hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and crying 
aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Refrain: Holy Unmercinaries (names) pray to God for us 
Let us hymn Christ the Savior who, through the grace of healing hath revealed the 
unmercenaries and physicians (names), as healers throughout all the world, curing the 
infirmities of all, for unto the ages is He glorified.  
From the holy ones, as from wellsprings of spiritual grace, rivers of miracles flow 
forth healing all manner of infirmities; let us, O faithful, praise Him Who hath 
granted them this power, for unto the ages is He glorified. 
Unmercenary physicians, bring your prayers unto God, that He deliver us from 
temptations and our many afflictions and from the terrible and frightful torments.  
Theotokion: Ceaseless protection of the afflicted, salvation and hope of the 
despairing, O all-praised Theotokos, ever entreat Christ that we be delivered from all 
misfortunes.  
ODE III 
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, * 
my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy salvation. 
Unto those born on earth O Lord, Thou hast revealed Thy holy (names), as 
mystic rays illumining the whole world; reveal also Thy mercies unto us.  
Since ye have freely received the gift of healing from God, you unselfishly grant 
healing, driving away demons, in accordance with the words of our Lord and God.  
The world ever hymneth your great charity and the multitude of your miracles, O 
holy physicians and wonder-workers, companions of the Angels.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Theotokion: We ever praise thee , O most pure one, as the divine tabernacle, the 
throne, and the portal, that hath sprung forth from David, and who hath given birth 
to God incarnate.  
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou that wast of Thy free will” 
Treading under your feet the sweet things of this life, * and by grace joyfully 
giving yourselves over to godly Martyrdom, * O sufferers and beacons of the 
inhabited world (names); * ye now intercede for us before God, Who is above all, * 
wherefore we entreat you * to deliver us from the darkness of sin and our infirmities.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone IV: 
O Virgin Theotokos, * thou art an invincible wall for all Orthodox Christians. * 
For having recourse unto thee we remain unharmed * and in thee we have a sure 
intercessor for the forgiveness of our sins; * wherefore rendering thanks unto thee, 
we cry aloud! ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace, the Lord is with thee. 
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin, * Mother of Christ God, * a sword 
pierced thy most holy soul * when thou didst behold thy Son and God * crucified of 
His own will. * Him do thou never cease to entreat, O blessed one, ** that He grant 
us the forgiveness of our transgressions.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only Theotokos, * the 
Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the flesh, O Word, * and 
with fear he glorified Thy power. 
Wondrous is the Savior, our God, for the bare bones of His holy ones lie in their 
tombs, but work wondrous and awesome miracles throughout the world; glory to Thy 
might, O Lord.  
Having forsaken earthly things as corruptible, O holy ones, ye have become 
inheritors of Zion and worthy citizens of the Kingdom of Christ.  
Worthily are you praised on earth, O healers of the sick and unmercenaries 
(names), for after your repose ye deliver all from their infirmities.  
Theotokion: Rejoice, tabernacle of the glory of God; Rejoice, weapon and fiery 
throne; Rejoice, overshadowed mount, from which was hewn the cornerstone, even 
Christ.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our God, * 
and we know none other besides Thee. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having received from God the power to heal, O unmercenaries (names), ye heal 
the diseases of all the infirm.  
Deemed worthy of great gifts from the Lord, O holy ministers, you selflessly cure 
all.  
Grant unto the whole world Thy mercies, O our Savior, for the sake of the 
intercessions of thy holy ministers (names), as Thou alone art Compassionate.  
Theotokion: Remaining a Virgin after birth we praise thee, O Mother of God, for 
thou hast brought into the world the Word of God in the flesh.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
Sailing on the sea of life and peacefully traversing the abyss, ye devoutly reached 
the calm haven, the highest kingdom, O holy unmercenaries.  
O holy unmercenaries, as wellsprings overflowing with grace ye emit wondrous 
healings, driving away maladies; ever intercede on behalf of our souls.  
Dwelling now joyfully in the heavens, O Martyrs, hasten to visit your venerable 
temple and cure our bodily infirmities and the passions of our souls.  
Theotokion: Let us praise her who is loftier than the Cherubim, the summit all 
creation, and who alone hath given birth unto the Creator and Lord opening unto us 
the gates of paradise.  
The Kontakion from the Typicon; but if there be none, chant the following: 
Kontakion, in Tone II: 
Ye have received the grace of healing, * O holy and wonderworking Physicians; * 
and ye grant health to those in need. * Come and visit us, repulsing the assaults of all 
enemies, * and heal the world through your wonderworking. 
Ikos: The proclamations of the wise physicians pass all understanding and 
wisdom, and yet grant understanding to all, for having received grace from the most 
High, they mystically bestow healing; wherefore, we have been granted the grace to 
hymn them as God-bearing favorites of Christ, and ministers, who miraculously heal 
all from all manner of infirmities.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord God 
of our Fathers. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Unto Thee, Who hath gloriously magnified the memory of the most wise 
unmercenaries on earth, do we chant: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our 
Fathers”  
Unto Thee, Who hath revealed the holy wonder-workers as honorable examples, 
do we chant: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our Fathers.”  
Celebrating the venerable memory of the unmercenaries, we joyfully cry unto 
Thee, O most compassionate One: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our Fathers.”  
Theotokion: Unto Thee, who hath dwelt in the womb of the Virgin and therein 
renewed Adam, do we chant: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, God of our Fathers.”  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the mystery of the 
Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning bush: * praise ye and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Unto Him, who from on high, hath bestowed upon His unmercenaries the gifts 
of healing and to cure diseases, do we sing: “Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages ages.”  
Unto Him, who hath bestowed upon His saints the grace to cure the infirmities of 
the diseased and to deliver our souls from the passions, do we sing: “Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages ages.”  
Who will not praise the unmercenaries for their virtuous lives, excelling that of all 
men? For they ceaselessly work great wonders, wherefore we sing: “Hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages ages.” 
Theotokion: Unto Him, who beyond all telling, made His abode within the womb 
of the Virgin, renewing fallen man, do we sing: “Hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages ages.”  
ODE IX 
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God Most 
High, * who art higher than the all-pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  
O holy unmercenaries (names), your shrines appear as fonts of healing, fleeing 
unto them as is meet, the faithful obtain healing.  
All ye who suffer from ailments, come and be cured of your various infirmities; 
come also ye beasts, for from the shrine of the holy ones issueth forth streams of 
miracles.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Finding your abode in the highest habitations, O holy ones, ye are also with us in 
the midst of your holy temple, invisibly bestowing your compassions upon us who 
send up hymns to the Almighty and devoutly bless you, O all-praised ones.  
Theotokion: Thou, O Theotokos, art our rampart and refuge, the protectress of 
all those who flee unto thee; we entreat thee to deliver us from our enemies.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “The heaven with stars ...”:  
O ye wonder-working beacons (names)! * having received from God the grace of 
healing, * heal our diseases of both soul and body.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone III: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making glad 
the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of good 
things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of grace!  
On the Aposticha, the Stichera, in Tone II:  
Physicians of the infirm, * treasuries of healing, and the salvation of the faithful, * 
most glorious unmercenaries! * Help those that call upon you in their time of need * 
and heal them of their sicknesses, * ever entreating the good Lord that we be 
delivered * from the snares of our enemies. (Twice)  
The fount of healing at Bethesda * healed but one sick person per year, * but the 
temple of the unmercenaries * doth heal a multitude of sufferers; * for the wealth of 
the holy ones is inexhaustible; * by their intercessions have mercy upon us, O Christ.  
The choir of the holy ones doth forever rejoice, * for they have inherited the 
Kingdom of heaven, * and the earth, having received their relics, doth emit sweet 
fragrances, * for they were servants of Christ * and have entered into eternal life.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Never ending is the grace which the holy ones have received from Christ, * 
wherewith their relics ceaselessly work miracles, * and invoking their names with 
faith, they heal incurable diseases, * O Lord, as Thou art the Lover of mankind * by 
their prayers deliver us from bodily and spiritual suffering.  
Both now ..., Theotokion in Tone VI: 
O all-hymned Theotokos, * the joy of all who sorrow, * the health of the diseased, 
* the peace of the persecuted, * the tranquility of the distressed, * intercession of the 
faithful, ** save thy city and thy people.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one seeing Thee hanging upon the cross * with 
maternal tears cried aloud to Thee: * “O my Son and God, * O my sweetest Child, * 
how is it that Thou sufferest ** such a shameful death?” 
The Doxology: 
If the service be with the Great Doxology, but not a Resurrection service, the 
Troparion is sung after the Doxology: 
Troparion, in Tone VIII:  
 O Holy and unmercenary wonderworkers, visit our infirmities. * Freely ye have 
received, freely give. 
The Dismissal: 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
Unto those born on earth O Lord, Thou hast revealed Thy holy (names), as 
mystic rays illumining the whole world; reveal also Thy mercies unto us. (Twice) 
Since ye have freely received the gift of healing from God, you unselfishly grant 
healing, driving away demons, in accordance with the words of our Lord and God.  
The world ever hymneth your great charity and the multitude of your miracles, O 
holy physicians and wonder-workers, companions of the Angels.  
Sailing on the sea of life and peacefully traversing the abyss, ye devoutly reached 
the calm haven, the highest kingdom, O holy unmercenaries.  
O holy unmercenaries, as wellsprings overflowing with grace ye emit wondrous 
healings, driving away maladies; ever intercede on behalf of our souls.  
Dwelling now joyfully in the heavens, O Martyrs, hasten to visit your venerable 
temple and cure our bodily infirmities and the passions of our souls.  
Theotokion: Let us praise her who is loftier than the Cherubim, the summit all 
creation, and who alone hath given birth unto the Creator and Lord opening unto us 
the gates of paradise.  
The Troparion and Kontakion from the Typicon, but if there be none, chant the 
following:  
Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
O Holy and unmercenary wonderworkers, visit our infirmities. * Freely ye have 
received, freely give. 
Kontakion, in Tone II:  
Ye have received the grace of healing, * O holy and wonderworking Physicians; * 
and ye grant health to those in need. * Come and visit us, repulsing the assaults of all 
enemies, * and heal the world through your wonderworking. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV, (Psalm 15:3, 8) In the saints that are in His earth, 
hath the Lord been wondrous, * He hath wrought all His desires in them. 
Verse: I beheld the Lord ever before me, for He is at my right hand that I 
might not be shaken. 
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. (12:4-5, 15-21) 
Brethren: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set 
some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that 
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Are all 
apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? Have all the 

--- PAGE 14 ---
gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly the 
best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the 
tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, 
or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all 
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to 
feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it 
profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her 
own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in 
the truth; Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 
Charity never faileth.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: Behold now, what is so good or so joyous as for brethren 
to dwell together in unity. 
Verse: For there the Lord hath commanded blessing and life for evermore.  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, § 34, (MT. 10: 1, 5-8) 
At that time, when Jesus had called unto Him His twelve disciples, He gave them 
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and 
all manner of disease. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying: 
“Go not into the way of the gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go, preach, saying: 
“The kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, 
cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”  
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright. 
