FLORAL TRIODION

LAZARUS SATURDAY
FRIDAY VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 8): Having come to the end of the forty days,* we beseech You, O Lord and Lover of mankind:* May we also behold the holy week of Your passion,* and glorify in it Your lofty deeds and Your ineffable work of salvation,* as we sing with one voice:* O Lord, glory to You.

(Tone 6): Desiring to see the tomb of Lazarus, O Lord,* even though You were going to dwell willingly in the tomb,* You asked: Where have you placed him?* And when You learned that which You already knew,* You called to the one whom You loved:* Lazarus, come forth from the tomb!* And Death obeyed the Giver of life,* the Savior of our souls.

Having arrived at the tomb of Lazarus on the fourth day,* You wept for Your friend, O Lord.* You gave life to the one who had been dead four days;* Death was bound up by Your voice,* and the grave-clothes were unbound by Your hands.* Therefore, the company of apostles were filled with joy,* and all the choirs sang with one voice:* Blessed are You, O Savior, have mercy on us.

The kingdom of Hades was demolished at the sound of Your voice, O Lord:* Your powerful word awakened from the tomb one who had been dead four days.* Lazarus becomes a saving prelude of our regeneration.* Nothing is impossible for the King of the universe,* O Lord, grant to Your servants forgiveness and great mercy.

Desiring to confirm the faith of Your disciples, O Lord,* in Your resurrection from the dead,* You came to the tomb of Lazarus.* And when You called him, Hades was despoiled,* and it gave up the one who had been dead four days:* he cried out to You: Blessed are You, O Lord, glory to You.

Taking Your disciples with You, O Lord,* You came to Bethany to awaken Lazarus from the dead;* and weeping over him in accordance with Your human nature,* as God, You raised the one who had been dead four days;* and he cried out to You, O Savior:* Blessed are You, O Lord, glory to You.

Glory be: (Tone 8): You have come to the tomb of Lazarus, O Lord,* and You called the dead one to awaken him from his sleep.* He shook off the dust of the tomb at Your immortal words;* and still bound by the grave-clothes,* he came forth at the sound of Your voice.* For You have power and lordship over all things,* and You are the Master of the whole world, O Lover of mankind:* O Lord, glory to You.

Now and for ever: Having come to the end of the forty days,* we cry out: Rejoice, O city of Bethany, the home of Lazarus!* Rejoice, Martha and Mary, for Christ shall come to you tomorrow;* by His word, He shall give life to your departed brother.* Hearing His voice, the cruel and insatiable Hades will give up Lazarus after four days.* Struck with admiration, the Hebrew people will carry palms and branches,* and they shall go before Him.* The children shall praise the One Whom their parents looked upon with envy:* Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel.

Prokimenon: Ps 123 (Tone 6)
Our help is in the name of the Lord, Who made heaven and earth.
Verse: The Lord has done great things for us.

A reading from the Book of Genesis (49:33-50:1-26).

Prokimenon: Ps 124 (Tone 4)
Those who put their trust in the Lord are like Mount Zion, which cannot be shaken, for it stands forever.
Verse: The scepter of the wicked will not prevail in the land given to the just.

A reading from the Book of Proverbs (31: 8-31).

If the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts is not being celebrated, then take the following stichera:

Aposticha

(Tone 4): You raised Your friend on the fourth day, O Christ,* putting an end to the funeral hymns of Martha and Mary;* You revealed to all that You are truly the One Who fills the whole world* with Your divine presence, by Your own power and will.* The Cherubim praise You unceasingly:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed are You, O supreme God, glory to You.

Verse: Arise, then, Lord, lift up Your hand! O God, do not forget the poor!

Martha said to Mary: The Master is here! He calls for you; go to Him! She hastened to the place where the Lord was, and seeing Him, she cried out, and bowing before Him she kissed His most pure feet and said: Lord, if You had been here, our brother would not have died.

Verse: I will praise You, Lord, with all my heart; I will recount all Your wonders.

(Tone 8): In Bethany, You woke Lazarus from a sleep of four days;* when You came to the tomb,* the dead man was given life by Your command.* Hades trembled as it released him.* What a wonder, indeed!* O Lord of mercy, glory to You!

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Lord, when You said to Martha: I am the resurrection,* You confirmed Your word of truth by Your deeds,* as You called Lazarus forth from Hades.* My passions have brought me down to death;* raise me up, I beseech You,* O Lover of mankind and compassionate Lord.

Canticle of Simeon; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; troparion: O Christ our God..., (p. 1250) (without the theotokion); the litany: Have mercy on us, O God...; three prostrations, and the daily dismissal, (p. 37).

SATURDAY MATINS

After God the Lord..., the troparion: O Christ our God... (p. 1250) (without the theotokion).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 1): Taking pity on the tears of Martha and Mary,* O Christ our God, You ordered the stone to be rolled away from the tomb;* by Your call, You raised the dead man and broke the bolts of Hades* to establish our faith in the life-giving resurrection of all.* Glory to Your power, O Savior;* glory to Your sovereign majesty;* glory to You, for by Your word You uphold the whole world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachalnoje Slovo): O Fountain of wisdom and eternal knowledge,* arriving at Bethany, You asked those who were with Martha:* Where have you placed Lazarus, my friend?* You wept tears of compassion over the one who had been dead four days;* and by Your voice, You raised him, O Giver of life* and compassionate Lord.

Hosts of angels; Hymn of the Resurrection; Psalm 50.

Canon – Ode 9

Omit the Magnificat. After the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the hirmos:

Hirmos (Tone 8): Come, all you people, let us glorify the holy Mother of God, who without being consumed, gave birth to the fire of the divinity in her womb; with our unceasing hymns, we extol her.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

The crowds, who saw a man dead four days now walking, were struck with wonder, and they cried out to the Redeemer: O Lord God, we extol You.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

To strengthen our faith in Your glorious resurrection, O Savior, You delivered Lazarus from Hades even though he had been dead four days; with our hymns, we extol You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: In an ineffable manner, O my Lord and Savior, You brought about my deliverance and my salvation, by Your own will and according to Your two natures.

Katabasia: We indeed acknowledge you as the Mother of God; through you we have found salvation. O most pure Virgin, with the choirs of angels, we extol you.

Omit: It is truly right...

Holy is the Lord our God (Tone 8) (3x).

Exapostilarion: Today, Lazarus rejoices in Your word, O Word of God, as he begins his life again; and the crowd greets You, O Almighty One, with palms and branches; for by Your death, You have utterly destroyed the kingdom of Hades.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 1): O Christ, our Resurrection and our Life,* You came to the tomb of Lazarus* to confirm our faith in Your two natures;* O long-suffering Lord, born of the most pure Virgin,* in Your humanity, You asked:* Where have you buried him?* And, in Your divinity, with a life-giving sign,* You raise the one who has been dead four days.

Even though Lazarus had been dead four days,* You raised him from Hades, O Christ;* before Your own death You destroyed the power of Death;* You freed one of Your friends from the tomb* to announce the resurrection of all.* Therefore, we bow before Your sovereign power and cry out:* Blessed are You, O Savior, have mercy on us.

Martha and Mary said to the Savior:* Lord, if You had been here, our brother would not have died.* And Christ, the Resurrection of the dead,* raised the one who had been dead four days.* Come, all you faithful, and bow before the One* Who comes in glory for our salvation.

You showed signs of Your divinity to Your disciples, O Christ,* but the crowds were not aware of this;* for in Your humility, You did not wish to reveal this to them.* As God, You told Your apostles that Lazarus was dead;* and in Your humanity, You asked the crowd at Bethany where they had buried Your friend.* And the one whom You raised on the fourth day* manifested the glory of Your power; O all-powerful Lord, glory to You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed..., (p. 140).

After the Great Doxology, the troparion: O Christ our God..., (p. 1250) (without the theotokion); the litanies; and the great dismissal, (pp. 36; 1250).

PALM SUNDAY

The resurrectional service of the tone of the week and that of the saint are not taken.

SATURDAY VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

Take the six following stichera:

(Tone 6): Today the grace of the Holy Spirit has gathered us together;* and taking up Your cross, we all say:* Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord!* Hosanna in the highest!

He Who has heaven as His throne and earth as His footstool,* the Son and coeternal Word of the Father,* humbles Himself to mount a senseless beast,* as He comes to Bethany.* Carrying branches, the Hebrew children welcome Him, saying:* Hosanna in the highest:* blessed is He Who is coming, the King of Israel!

Let us all gather this day,* the new Israel, the Church of the Gentiles,* and with the prophet Zechariah, let us say:* Rejoice, O daughter Zion, shout for joy, O daughter of Jerusalem!* Behold, your King comes to you;* He is the Savior, meek and humble,* seated on the foal of a donkey, a beast of burden.* Carrying palms, let us praise Him as did the children:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who is coming, the King of Israel!

Prefiguring Your holy resurrection for us, O Lord,* by Your word, You raised Your friend Lazarus* from death and the tomb on the fourth day.* You rode upon the foal of a donkey* to symbolize for the Gentiles the triumph of the Savior.* Therefore, Israel, Your beloved, offers You praise, O Christ,* through the mouths of infants and babes,* the witnesses of Your entrance into the Holy City,* six days before the Passover.

(Tone 2): When You entered the Holy City, O Lord,* as You hastened to Your passion to fulfill the law and the prophets,* the Hebrew children prefigured Your victorious resurrection;* they went before You with palms and branches, saying:* Blessed are You, O Savior; have mercy on us.

Glory to You, O Christ, Who are seated in the heavens,* and now Your cross awaits You.* The daughter of Zion rejoices,* the peoples of the earth exult with joy,* the children wave the branches,* the disciples spread their garments, and the whole world learns to sing: *Blessed are You, O Savior: have mercy on us.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Six days before the Passover Jesus comes to Bethany,* and His disciples ask Him:* Lord, where do You want us to prepare to eat the Passover with You?* And You sent them off, saying:* Go to the village nearby, and there you shall find a man carrying a pitcher of water;* follow him and say to the master of the house:* The Master says to you:* It is in your house that I will celebrate the Passover with My disciples.

The entrance; O Joyful Light; the Saturday prokimenon: The Lord reigns...; and the following readings:

Lector: A reading from the Book of the Prophet Zechariah:
"Thus says the Lord: Rejoice heartily, O daughter Zion, shout for joy, O daughter Jerusalem! See, your king shall come to you; a just savior is he, Meek, and riding on an ass, on a colt, the foal of an ass. He shall banish the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem; The warrior’s bow shall be banished, and he shall proclaim peace to the nations. His dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth. As for you; for the blood of your covenant with me, I will bring forth your prisoners from the dungeon: In the return to the fortress of the waiting prisoners, This very day, I will return you double for your exile. For I will bend Judah as my bow, I will arm myself with Ephraim; I will arouse your sons, O Zion, [against your sons, O Yavan,] and I will use you as a warrior’s sword. The LORD shall appear over them, and his arrow shall shoot forth as lightning; The LORD God shall sound the trumpet, and come in a storm from the south. The LORD of hosts shall be a shield over them, they shall overcome, sling stones and trample them underfoot; They shall drink blood like wine, till they are filled with it like libation bowls, like the corners of the altar (9: 9-15)."

Other readings: Genesis (49: 1-2, 8-12); Zephaniah (3: 14-19).

Stichera at Litiya

(Tone 1): The Holy Spirit, Who taught the apostles to speak in foreign tongues,* now inspires the children to sing:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who is coming, the King of Israel!

The Son and Word of God, coeternal with the Father,* today enters the city of Jerusalem,* seated upon a senseless beast;* He, upon Whom the Cherubim dare not gaze,* is praised by the children with palms and branches,* as they mystically sing to Him:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who comes to save the human race.

Six days before the Passover, O Lord,* Your voice was heard even in the depths of Hades,* from which You raised Lazarus on the fourth day.* And the Hebrew children praised You:* Hosanna, Our God, glory to You!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 3): Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany,* to raise Lazarus on the fourth day* and to proclaim the coming resurrection.* The sisters of Lazarus, Martha and Mary, came to meet Him, saying:* Lord, if You had been here, our brother would not have died.* But the Lord answered them, saying:* Those who believe in Me, even if they die, shall live.* Have I not said this to you?* Show Me where you have buried him.* And, with a loud voice, the Creator of the universe cried to him:* Lazarus, come forth!

Aposticha

(Tone 8): Rejoice, O city of Zion,* and dance with joy, O Church of God;* for, behold, your King comes to you in meekness and humility;* the children welcome Him and sing:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed are You, O compassionate Lord; have mercy on us.

Verse: On the lips of children and of babes, You have found praise.

The Savior has come into the city of Jerusalem today* to fulfill the Scriptures.* The people spread their garments along the way;* they carry palms and branches in their hands,* recognizing that He is indeed our God.* The cherubim sing unceasingly to Him:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed are You, O compassionate Lord; have mercy on us.

Verse: How great is Your name, O Lord our God, through all the earth!

You are seated upon the throne of the Cherubim* and are praised by the Seraphim;* as David, You rode upon a donkey.* The children praise You as God;* the Pharisees blaspheme You unjustly;* and Your riding upon the colt symbolizes the conversion of the pagans.* O only Lover of mankind and compassionate Lord, glory to You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Today the grace of the Holy Spirit has gathered us together;* and taking up Your cross, we all say:* Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest.

Canticle of Simeon; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the troparion: O Christ our God... (p. 1250); then immediately without the Glory be: Now and for ever: the troparion: We have been buried... (p. 1251). Then the blessing of the breads, Psalm 33, and the great dismissal.

SUNDAY MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion: O Christ our God... (p. 1250), Glory be: Now and for ever: We have been buried..., (p. 1251).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Carrying palms in spirit and with our souls purified,* as the children of old, let us praise Christ in faith;* and let us sing to Him with a full voice: Blessed are You, O Savior,* Who come into this world to save Adam from the ancient curse,* and Who have willed to become the new spiritual Adam.* O Word, You have fulfilled all things for our salvation, glory to You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Having raised Lazarus who had been in the tomb four days, O Lord,* You teach us to cry out with palms and branches:* Blessed is He Who comes to us.

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): O Christ, You shed tears over Your friend,* and You raised Lazarus from the dead,* even though he was already buried.* Thus, You showed Your tender compassion;* the multitude of children heard of Your coming, O Savior,* and they went out today with palms in their hands, crying out to You:* Hosanna! Blessed is He Who comes to save the human race!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 1): O peoples and nations, sing with one voice:* The King of the angels comes, seated upon the colt of a donkey,* to conquer the enemy by the power of the cross.* The children carry palms and cry out to Him:* Glory, victory and welcome;* glory to You, O Christ our Savior;* glory and praise to our only God!

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Christ the Giver of life,* and we also sing to You: Hosanna in the highest:* blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord!

Verse: The Lord is great in Zion. He is supreme over all the peoples.
Verse: Mount Zion rejoices: the people of Judah rejoice.
Verse: O praise the Lord, Jerusalem! Zion, praise your God!
Verse: May the name of the Lord be proclaimed in Zion, and His praise in the heart of Jerusalem.
Verse: The Lord will reign forever, Zion's God, from age to age.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Podoben – Povelinoje tajno): He is seated upon the Cherubim,* and for us now mounts upon a colt; He hears the children crying to Him: Hosanna!* The crowds also shout: Blessed are You, O Son of David!* Hasten to save those whom Your hand has fashioned:* for our salvation, You have come to reveal Your glory.

Gradual Hymn: Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 8 (Tone 4)
On the lips of children and of babes, You have found praise.
Verse: How great is Your name, O Lord our God, through all the earth!

Gospel according to Matthew (Begin. 83; 21:1-11; 15-17).
[At that time,] when [Jesus] drew near Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples, saying to them, “Go into the village opposite you, and immediately you will find an ass tethered, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them here to me. And if anyone should say anything to you, reply, ‘The master has need of them.’ Then he will send them at once.” This happened so that what had been spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled: “Say to daughter Zion, ‘Behold, your king comes to you, meek and riding on an ass, and on a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.’” The disciples went and did as Jesus had ordered them. They brought the ass and the colt and laid their cloaks over them, and he sat upon them. The very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and strewed them on the road. The crowds preceding him and those following kept crying out and saying: “Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, hosanna in the highest.” And when he entered Jerusalem the whole city was shaken and asked, “Who is this?” And the crowds replied, “This is Jesus the prophet, from Nazareth in Galilee.” When the chief priests and the scribes saw the wondrous things he was doing, and the children crying out in the temple area, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant and said to him, “Do you hear what they are saying?” Jesus said to them, “Yes; and have you never read the text, ‘Out of the mouths of infants and nurslings you have brought forth praise’?” And leaving them, he went out of the city to Bethany, and there he spent the night.

The Hymn of the Resurrection is omitted. During Psalm 50 the priest incenses the willow branches on the tetrapod on all four sides; then begins:

The Blessing of Willow Branches

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: O Lord our God, Who sit upon the Cherubim, and Who restored the might of Your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, that through His cross and burial and resurrection He might save the world; Who, also, when today He entered Jerusalem to embark upon His voluntary passion, was met by the people who sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, bearing the symbols of victory, boughs of trees and branches of palms, emblematic of the resurrection: keep and preserve us also who on this prefestal day in imitation of them bear in our hands palms and boughs. And like those nations and children who cried to You: ‘Hosanna!’ may we likewise with hymn and spiritual song be made worthy of the life-giving resurrection through Christ Jesus, our Lord, with Whom You are blessed together with Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and forever.
Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be with all!
Choir: And with your spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord!

The priest says the prayer of the blessing:
O Lord God, Ruler of the universe! During times of the righteous and just Noah, You revealed the ark to be a prefigurement of the Church, foretelling the coming of the most Holy Spirit through the dove that brought the olive branch. This prefigurement was fulfilled by the Jewish children who greeted You with olive and palm branches, giving You praise, and shouting: Hosanna in the highest! Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord! Therefore, just as You blessed the greeting people bearing branches, so too, O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, bless and sanctify these boughs and willow branches, so that all who receive them, may receive through them protection of their souls and bodies; may they be a medicine for our salvation and a sacrament of Your grace. Every place where they will be placed, may those, who dwell there, receive Your blessing. Having driven away all hostile powers, may Your right hand protect those, whom You have redeemed with Your most precious blood; so that we may all sing together: Hosanna, blessed is He who judges justly with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and forever.
Choir: Amen.

The priest then sprinkles the willow branches with holy water, saying:
These willow branches are blessed by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

The choir sings:
Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): Today Christ enters the city of Bethany, seated upon the colt of a donkey, to signify the submission of the pagans to the Wisdom and the Word of God.
Verse (Tone 6): Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your compassion, blot out my offense.
Today the grace of the Holy Spirit has gathered us together; and taking up Your cross, we all say: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest.

Canon (Tone 4)

Hirmos 1: The springs of the abyss have held back their floods: the foam of the sea no longer hides its foundations; with a sign You have made the waters flow back and saved Your chosen people, who sing a hymn of victory to You, O Lord.

Hirmos 3: The people of Israel drank from the hardened rock which was changed into a spring at Your command; and You Yourself, O Christ, are the rock of our life. On this rock the Church was founded; and we now sing to You: Hosanna, blessed are You, O Lord Who is coming.

Hirmos 4: Christ is coming and reveals Himself as our God; He shall come without delay; coming forth from a spouseless Virgin. He comes from the overshadowed mountain, as the prophet of old has spoken. And we join our voices to sing: Glory to Your power, O Lord.

Hirmos 5: Go and announce on the mountain of Zion the good news for Jerusalem; lift your voice and proclaim the glory which comes to the city of God: Peace be upon Israel and salvation to the Gentiles.

Hirmos 6: The hearts of the just exult with joy; a new covenant is granted to the world: The covenant is renewed in the blood of God.

Hirmos 7: You saved the children of Abraham from the furnace, and You made the Chaldeans perish in the fire they themselves had prepared: O Lord, most worthy of our hymns, blessed are You, O God of our ancestors.

Hirmos 8: Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and keep a feast, all you who love Zion! The One Who reigns forever, the Lord of powers, has come; the universe bows before Him, and the earth praises Him: Bless the Lord, all you works of the Lord.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the ninth hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol Christ Who sits on the colt of a donkey.

Hirmos (Tone 4): God is the Lord and He has revealed Himself to us; let us celebrate this feast in joy. Come, with palms and branches, let us extol Christ. Let us cry out to Him in joy: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
Why this tumult among the nations? O scribes and Pharisees, why do you murmur in vain when you say: Who is this to whom the children sing as they carry their palms and branches, and say: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior?

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
This is God Who has no equal! Having opened the path to holiness, He has given it to Israel His beloved; then He revealed Himself in our humanity, so that, having seen Him, we may sing: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Why do the rebellious people place so many obstacles on the path of salvation? Their feet hasten to pour out the blood of the Lord; but surely, He shall rise to save those who sing to Him: Blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord, our Savior.

Refrain: O my soul extol Christ...
Katabasia: God is the Lord... (see above).

Holy is the Lord our God (Tone 4) (3x).
Exapostilarion is omitted.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4): A great multitude of people* spread their garments along Your path, O Lord;* others cut branches to strew along the way.* The crowds who went before You, along with those who followed, sang out:* Hosanna to the Son of David;* blessed is He Who comes and Who shall come in the name of the Lord.

Come, all you peoples and nations,* and contemplate today the King of heaven;* He enters Jerusalem humbly seated upon a colt as upon an exalted throne.* O peoples, see the Lord Who became flesh to save us,* according to the vision of the prophet Isaiah.* Behold, the Spouse of the new Zion;* for His most pure and immaculate wedding feast,* the multitude of innocent children run after Him, singing praise.* Therefore, with the angels, we also sing:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who brings salvation to us.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Before Your passion, O Christ our God,* You confirmed the belief in the resurrection of all:* by Your power, You raised Lazarus at Bethany on the fourth day,* and You gave sight to those who were blind, O Savior and Giver of light.* Then You entered the holy city with Your disciples, O Lord,* seated upon a colt as upon the throne of the Cherubim,* to fulfill the prophecies.* The Hebrew children carried palms and accompanied You.* Therefore, we also carry our branches, and in thanksgiving, we cry out:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord.

After the great doxology, the troparion: O Christ our God..., (p. 1250), Glory be: Now and for ever: We have been buried..., (p. 1251), the litanies, and great dismissal.

SUNDAY VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

Take only the following stichera from the Triodion:

(Tone 8): Rejoice, O city of Zion,* and dance with joy, O Church of God;* for, behold, your King comes to you in meekness and humility;* the children welcome Him and sing: Hosanna in the highest;* blessed are You, O compassionate Lord; have mercy on us.

The Savior has come into the city of Jerusalem today* to fulfill the Scriptures.* The people spread their garments along the way;* they carry palms and branches in their hands,* recognizing that He is indeed our God.* The Cherubim sing unceasingly to Him:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed are You, O compassionate Lord; have mercy on us.

Glory be: Now and for ever: You are seated upon the throne of the Cherubim* and are praised by the Seraphim;* as David, You rode upon a donkey.* The children praise You as God;* the Pharisees blaspheme You unjustly;* and Your riding upon the colt symbolizes the conversion of the pagans.* O only Lover of mankind and compassionate Lord, glory to You.

The entrance; after O Joyful Light, take the Sunday prokimenon: And now bless the Lord...; the hymn Deign, O Lord; and the litany Let us complete our evening prayer....

Aposticha

(Tone 6): Six days before the Passover Jesus comes to Bethany,* and His disciples ask Him: Lord,* where do You want us to prepare to eat the Passover with You?* And You sent them off, saying:* Go to the village nearby,* and there you shall find a man carrying a pitcher of water;* follow him and say to the master of the house:* The Master says to you:* It is in your house that I will celebrate the Passover with My disciples.

Verse: Sing a new song to the Lord, for He has worked wonders!

(Tone 4): When You entered the holy city, O Lord,* the crowds carried branches and praised You as the Master of the universe;* seeing You seated upon a colt as upon the throne of the Cherubim,* they praised You, saying:* Hosanna in the highest;* blessed is He Who comes in the name of the Lord.

Verse: All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

(Tone 3): It is awesome to fall into the hands of the living God!* For He judges our thoughts and the secrets of our hearts;* let no one test His irreproachable fidelity!* But in fear and humility* let us go to Christ* and beseech His help and His great mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 1): Passing from the feast of palms and branches, O faithful,* to the venerable and saving solemnity of the sufferings of Christ,* let us behold Him Who voluntarily endures His passion for us,* and in thanksgiving, let us sing:* O Fountain of mercy and Harbor of salvation, O Lord, glory to You!

Canticle of Simeon; Holy God; Most Holy Trinity; Our Father; all the rest beginning with Hail, Mother of God, (p. 39), to the prayer of St. Ephrem, which is said only once, without the repetitions; God be merciful... and Psalm 33 are omitted; instead, the priest immediately intones: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope...; and then the dismissal, (p. 1251).

GREAT WEEK
GREAT MONDAY MATINS

Instead of God the Lord..., we sing the Alleluia (Tone 8) and the troparion: Behold, the Bridegroom..., (p. 1251) without the theotokion.

Behold, the Bridegroom comes in the middle of the night. Blessed is the servant He finds awake. But the one He finds neglectful will not be worthy of Him. Beware, therefore, O my soul! Do not fall into a deep slumber, lest you be delivered unto death and the door of the kingdom be closed unto you. Watch instead and cry out: Holy, Holy, Holy are You, O God. Through the intercession of the Mother of God have mercy on us.

Lenten Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj Spase): Today the holy passion rises like a light of salvation upon the world;* for Christ, Who loves us, is going to His suffering,* and He Who holds the universe in His hands,* is willingly nailed to the cross* for the salvation of the human race.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat above).

(Tone 1): Your incarnation reveals You to our eyes, O Judge invisible;* and You allow Yourself to be condemned to death by the lawless ones.* By Your passion, You condemn our own condemnation,* and we all praise You with one voice:* Glory and honor to Your power, O Word of God.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat above).

(Tone 8): The coming day shines with the beginning of the passion of the Lord.* Come, let us celebrate this mystery;* let us go to meet Him with our hymns.* For the Creator draws near to endure the cross:* led before Pilate, He submits to the questions, the whipping and the judgment;* struck by a servant, He endures all to save the human race.* Therefore, we cry out to Him:* O Christ our God, the Lover of mankind,* grant the forgiveness of their sins* to those who venerate Your holy passion with faith.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat above).

After the Sessional hymns, the priest reads the Gospel (Mt 21:18-22) after intoning the words: That we may be deemed worthy....
After the Gospel: Psalm 50.

Canon – Ode 9

Omit the Magnificat. After the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the hirmos:

Hirmos (Tone 2): Through You, O Christ, the Mother of God who gave You birth, was extolled; You have become flesh in her womb to suffer for us, O our Creator; and You have wiped away our sins. And we, who from age to age call her blessed, now extol You.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
You said to Your apostles, O Lord and Wisdom of the universe: Turn away from the defilement of the passions, that you may receive the perfect knowledge of the kingdom of God; in this you shall be glorified, and you shall shine brighter than the sun.

Glory be: Now and for ever: You said to Your disciples, O Lord: Take your example from Me; do not have haughty thoughts, but follow the path of humility; the cup from which I shall drink, you shall drink, that you may be glorified with Me in the kingdom of heaven.

Katabasia: Through You, O Christ... (see above).
Omit It is truly right....

Exapostilarion: I see Your bridal chamber completely engulfed with light, O my Savior, and I do not have a wedding garment to enter and enjoy Your brightness; fill the garment of my soul with light, and save me, O Lord, save me.

Aposticha

(Tone 5): Not understanding the depth of the ineffable mystery of Your plan of salvation,* the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to You, O Lord:* she asked You to grant them the places of honor in a temporal kingdom;* but in place of these honors,* You proclaimed to Your friends that they would drink from the cup of death, the same cup from which You shall first drink* to cleanse us of our sins.* Therefore, we cry out to You:* O Savior of our souls, glory to You!

Verse: In the morning... (p. 146).
When You taught Your disciples to seek that which is higher,* You said to them, O Lord:* Do not imitate the pagans by lording over those who are weak;* it shall not be that way with you.* For I have chosen to be poor;* the first among you shall become the servant of the rest;* the one who commands shall be as the one who obeys:* the most noble shall be as the lowest.* For I Myself have come to serve the poverty of Adam* and to give My life as a ransom for the many* who now sing: O Lord, glory to You!

Verse: Let the favor of the Lord..., (p. 146).

(Tone 8): O faithful, let us fear the punishment of the fig tree* which was dried up for not having borne any fruit;* let us offer worthy fruits of repentance to Christ,* Who grants us His great mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The Serpent thought he found a second Eve in the Egyptian woman,* who tried to make Joseph succumb to her words of flattery.* But he avoided sinning;* he left his garment behind, but was not ashamed of his nudity,* as were our first parents after their disobedience.* Through his prayers, O Christ, have mercy on us.

It is good to give thanks...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; Standing in the temple... (p. 147); the rest is as in lenten Matins to the end; then the dismissal, (p. 1251).

GREAT MONDAY VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 1): Going freely to His passion, the Lord said to His disciples along the way:* Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem,* and the Son of Man shall be delivered up, as it is written.* Come, let us purify our thoughts that we may go with Him;* let us be crucified with Him;* in Him we shall die to the pleasures of this life,* that we may live with Him and hear Him say to us:* I am no longer going to the earthly Jerusalem to suffer,* but I am going to My Father and your Father,* to My God and your God;* you shall go with Me to the heavenly Jerusalem* in the kingdom of heaven.

(Tone 5): O faithful, let us hasten to the saving passion of Christ our God;* let us glorify His long-suffering which is beyond expression,* that He may save us from sin and death,* and that He may also raise us in His goodness and love for mankind.

Glory be: Now and for ever: When You were going to Your passion, O Lord,* You confirmed the faith of Your disciples by taking them aside and saying:* How can you forget the words I have spoken to you?* The Scriptures say that all the prophets die only in Jerusalem!* Now the time of which I have spoken to you has arrived;* behold, I shall be delivered into the hands of sinners;* they shall mock Me and nail Me to the cross;* and after burying Me, they shall number Me among the dead.* Take courage, however, for I shall rise on the third day,* to bring joy and eternal life to all the faithful.

Prokimenon: Ps 127 (Tone 6)
May the Lord bless you from Zion,* and you will see the good of Jerusalem.
Verse: O blessed are you who fear the Lord and walk in His ways.

A reading from the Book of Exodus: (1:1-20).

Prokimenon: Ps 128 (Tone 6)
We bless you in the name of the Lord.
Verse: They have pressed me hard from my youth.

A reading from the Book of Job: (1:1-12).

Gospel: Mt 24: 3-35. The priest begins with the intonation: That we may be deemed worthy.... In the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, this Gospel is read after: Let our prayer rise like incense...; If only Vespers is being celebrated, this Gospel is read after the readings from the Old Testament. After the Gospel, take Deign, O Lord... and the usual Lenten Vespers; the stichera of the aposticha are taken from Monday Matins, (p. 535); for the dismissal (p. 1251).

On the evening of Great Monday, Great Compline is taken.

GREAT TUESDAY MATINS

Instead of God the Lord..., take the Alleluia (Tone 8) and the troparion: Behold, the Bridegroom... (p. 1251) without the theotokion.

Lenten Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4): O faithful, let us be on fire with love for the Bridegroom,* and with lamps burning, let us go out to meet Him.* May the light of our virtues shine brightly,* and may our faith be radiant.* With the wise virgins, let us prepare to enter the banquet hall of the Lord;* for the divine Spouse offers us all the crown of immortality.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): The priests, the scribes and the council of the impious* have gathered against You, O God our Savior;* through jealousy they persuaded Judas to betray You;* he was not ashamed to go out and speak against You,* saying to the lawless ones:* What will you give me if I hand Him over to you?* O Lord, spare our souls from such a condemnation.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 8): Impelled by his burning love of money,* the impious Judas ponders and plots the betrayal of his Master.* He falls from light into darkness;* he sells the One Who is beyond all price;* and for the price of his betrayal,* the miserable one meets death through hanging.* Spare us this same destiny, O Christ our God,* and grant the forgiveness of sins* to those who with love praise Your holy passion.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the sessional hymns the priest reads the Gospel (Mt 22:15-23:28) beginning with the intonation: That we may be deemed worthy....
After the Gospel, Psalm 50.

Canon – Ode 9

Omit the Magnificat. After the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the hirmos:

Hirmos (Tone 2): Your womb was able to contain the infinite God, and you gave birth to the Joy of the universe; we praise you, O Virgin Mother of God.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You.
You said to Your disciples, O God most good: Be vigilant, for you do not know the time of the coming of the Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: At Your awesome and second coming, O Master, place me at Your right side with Your sheep, and do not consider the multitude of my sins.

Katabasia: Your womb... (see above).
Omit It is truly right....

Exapostilarion: I see Your bridal chamber completely engulfed with light, O my Savior,* and I do not have a wedding garment to enter and enjoy Your brightness;* fill the garment of my soul with light,* and save me, O Lord, save me.

Aposticha

(Tone 6): Come, O faithful, let us zealously labor for the Lord;* for He entrusts His riches to His servants;* let each multiply the talent of grace.* Let one gain wisdom by doing good;* let another serve with splendor;* let the faithful share the knowledge of faith with the unenlightened;* let others share their goods with the poor.* Thus we shall multiply the treasure that has been entrusted to us,* and we shall be the faithful stewards of grace,* and we shall be worthy of the joy of the Lord.* Grant this to us, O Christ our God,* in Your goodness toward mankind.

When You shall come in glory with the powers of heaven,* to be seated on the throne of judgment, O Jesus,* do not cast me far away from You, O Good Shepherd.* On Your right are the paths that lead to You,* and on Your left are those who turn away from You.* Do not make me perish with the goats,* even though I have been disfigured by sin.* But place me on Your right with Your sheep,* and in Your love for mankind, save me.

O Bridegroom, Whose grace surpasses all human beauty,* You invite us to the spiritual feast in Your palace.* Strip me of the coarse garment of my sin,* and make me a partaker of Your passion.* Clothe me in the glorious adornment of Your beauty.* In Your mercy, accept me as a luminous guest* at the banquet in Your kingdom.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 7): Behold, the Lord entrusts His talent to you;* accept this gift with fear, O my soul.* Multiply it for the One Who granted it to you;* share it with the poor and you shall have the Lord as your friend.* Then you shall be at His right when He comes in glory,* and you shall hear His blessed voice say to you:* You are indeed My servant; enter into the joy of your Lord.* Even though I have gone astray, O Lord,* make me worthy of this joy.

It is good to give thanks...; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; Standing in the temple... (p. 147); the rest as in Matins of the Great Fast to the end; then the dismissal, (p. 1251).

GREAT TUESDAY VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 1): How shall I enter the splendor of Your saints,* because of my unworthiness?* If I dare to enter into Your bridal chamber,* my garment shall give me away;* for I do not have a wedding garment,* and the angels shall cast me out.* Purify my soul, O Lord, and in Your goodness, save me.

(Tone 2): My slothful soul has fallen into sleep, O Christ, my Spouse,* and I do not have a lamp shining with the fire of virtues.* I have become like the foolish virgins;* for, instead of laboring, I have wasted my time.* Do not close off Your love and Your heart to me, O Master;* but dispel my dark slumber;* awaken me that I may enter Your palace with the wise virgins.* There the choir of the just shall resound as they sing to You:* O Lord, glory to You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): You have heard of the condemnation of the one who hid the talent;* O my soul, do not hide the word of God.* Proclaim His wonders and increase His gifts,* that you may enter into the joy of your Lord.

Prokimenon: Ps 131 (Tone 6)
Go up, Lord, to the place of Your rest,* You and the ark of Your strength.
Verse: O Lord, remember David and all the hardships he endured.

A reading from the Book of Exodus: (2:5-10).

Prokimenon: Ps 132 (Tone 4)
How good and how pleasant it is,* when people live in unity.
Verse: It is like precious oil upon the head running down upon the beard, running down upon Aaron’s beard.

A reading from the Book of Job: (1:13-22).

Gospel: Mt 24:36 - 26:2 (see the note on page 534).
Stichera of the aposticha: p. 539.
On the evening of Great Tuesday, Great Compline is taken.

GREAT WEDNESDAY MATINS

Instead of God the Lord..., we take Alleluia (Tone 8) and the troparion: Behold, the Bridegroom..., (p. 1251) without the theotokion.

Lenten Sessional Hymns

(Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): The harlot drew near to You, O God of goodness,* to pour upon Your feet the precious ointment along with her tears;* at Your command, she was delivered from the scourge of evil;* but the ungrateful disciple who was filled with Your grace,* turned away from You and sunk into the mire* by betraying You through his greed.* Glory to Your infinite mercy, O Christ.
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Driven by his love of money,* Judas the traitor cunningly planned to sell You,* O Lord, the Treasure of life;* in his frenzy, he hastened to the impious ones and said:* What will you give me, and I will deliver Him to you to be crucified?
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob Tvoj Spase): With her sighs, the sinful woman cried out to You, O God of goodness,* and as she fervently dried Your most pure feet with her hair,* she said from the depths of her heart:*
