ABRIDGED HOROLOGION

VESPERS

Vespers with Nocturnal Vigil (Litiya): The priest, vested in the epitrachelion and phelonion (monks vest in the mantle), opens the holy doors. The deacon performs the incensing as usual, while the priest, during that time, stands before the altar. After the incensing, the deacon says in a low voice: Master, give the blessing! Then he leaves the sanctuary and stands before the holy doors, and exclaims: Master, proceed! [However, where it is customary, the holy doors are opened, the deacon exits through the northern door, stands before the holy doors, and exclaims: Master, proceed! Then he returns to the sanctuary, takes a candle and goes before the priest, who performs the incensing as prescribed. After the incensing, the deacon, returning to his place before the holy doors, says in a low voice: Master, give the blessing!]

Then the priest at the altar intones:
Glory be to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, always, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen. Come let us adore.... Then Ps. 103

The priest closes the holy doors, takes off the phelonion, and, vested only in the epitrachelion (and mantle), departs through the northern door and stands before the holy doors, where he reads the Prayers of Light. The deacon remains in the sanctuary.

Vespers without Nocturnal Vigil (Litiya): At Daily Vespers or at Great Vespers without Litiya, the priest, vested in the epitrachelion (and mantle, at Great Vespers), exits via the northern door and, standing before the closed holy doors, makes a small bow and intones:

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!
Heavenly King, Advocate, Spirit of Truth,* Who are everywhere present and fill all things,* Treasury of Blessings, Bestower of Life, come and dwell within us;* cleanse us of all that defiles us,* and, O Good One, save our souls.

Holy God, Holy and Mighty, Holy and Immortal, have mercy on us. (3x)

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,* now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Trinity most holy, have mercy on us.* Cleanse us of our sins, O Lord;* pardon our transgressions, O Master;* look upon our weaknesses and heal them, O Holy One;* for the sake of Your name.

Lord, have mercy. (3x)

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,* now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Father, Who art in heaven,* hallowed be Thy name.* Thy kingdom come.* Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.* Give us this day our daily bread,* and forgive us our trespasses* as we forgive those who trespass against us.* And lead us not into temptation,* but deliver us from evil.

Priest: For the kingdom, the power and the glory are Yours, Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy. (12x)
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Come, let us adore the King, our God.
Come, let us adore Christ, the King and our God.
Come, let us adore and bow down to the only Lord Jesus Christ, the King and our God.

Psalm 103

Bless the Lord, O my soul!* You are very great, O Lord, my God,
Clothed in pomp and brilliance;* arrayed with light as with a cloak.
Stretching out the sky as a tent-cloth,* covering Your lofty halls with water,
You make the clouds Your conveyance;* You surge on the wings of the wind.
You make spirits Your messengers,* and flaming fires Your attendants.
You settle the earth on its firm foundation;* it shall stand unmoved from age to age.
The abyss covers it like a garment;* waters stand over the mountains.
At Your rebuke they will take flight;* at the peal of Your thunder they will fear.
They hurdle the hills and run down the dales,* to the place You have chosen for them.
You have set up a boundary not to be passed;* they shall never return to cover the earth.
Down in the gullies You make springs to rise;* water shall go down between the mountains.
They shall give drink to the beasts of the field;* wild asses will seek them to quench their thirst.
The birds of the sky will abide by them;* from among the rocks they will raise their song.
From Your lofty halls You refresh the mountains;* the earth shall be fed with the fruit of Your works.
You make green pastures for the cattle,* and food-plants for the service of all,
So that bread may be brought forth from the earth,* and wine that gladdens the heart of all;
So that oil may put a gleam upon his face;* and that bread may strengthen the heart of all.
The trees of the plain will be satisfied,* the cedars of Lebanon that He planted.
The sparrows will build their nests in them;* and the herons will call them their home.
To the deer belong high mountains,* to rodents, the shelter of the rocks.
You have made the moon to mark the seasons;* the sun knows the time of its setting.
You establish darkness, and it is night,* wherein all the forest creatures prowl around.
Young lions roar for their prey,* and call out to God for their meat.
As the sun rises, they will come together,* and lay themselves down in their dens.
Man will go out to his labor,* and work until eventide.
How great are Your works, O Lord!* In wisdom You have wrought them all.
The earth is filled with Your creatures.* Even the wide and open sea itself,
Within it there are countless creeping things,* living beings small and large.
Upon it there are ships a-sailing,* and that great beast You made to have fun therein.
All of them look up to You,* to give them their food in due time.
You provide and they gather up;* You open Your hand and they are full.
You hide Your face and they cringe;* You suspend their breath, and they die and return to their dust.
You send forth Your breath and they live;* You renew the face of the earth.
May the Lord’s glory endure forever;* may the Lord rejoice in His works;
He looks upon the earth and makes it quake;* He touches the mountains and they smoke.
I will sing to the Lord as long as I live;* I will praise my God as long as I last.
Would that my thoughts be pleasing to Him:* and I will rejoice in the Lord.
May sinners vanish from the earth, and may the wicked be no more.* Bless the Lord, O my soul!
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God (3x).