Seventh Gospel: Jn. 20: 1-10

[At that time,] on the first day of the week, Mary of Magdala came to the tomb early in the morning, while it was still dark, and saw the stone removed from the tomb. So she ran and went to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and told them, "They have taken the Lord from the tomb, and we don't know where they put Him." So Peter and the other disciple went out and came to the tomb. They both ran, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and arrived at the tomb first; he bent down and saw the burial cloths there, but did not go in. When Simon Peter arrived after him, he went into the tomb and saw the burial cloths there, and the cloth that had covered His head was not with the burial cloths but rolled up in a separate place. Then the other disciple also went in, the one who had arrived at the tomb first, and he saw and believed. For they did not yet understand the scripture that He had to rise from the dead. Then the disciples returned home.

Exapostilarion:
When Mary Magdalene said they have carried away my Lord,* Peter and the other disciple whom Jesus loved hastened to the grave.* They both came and found the wrappings inside the tomb,* and the cloth, which was on His head, lying aside.* The disciples remained silent until they truly beheld Christ.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O most merciful Christ, * You performed wondrous deeds for my sake.* You were born of a virgin Maiden in a manner beyond description;* You suffered the crucifixion and death;* and You rose in glory, releasing our nature from death.* Therefore, glory to Your majesty and power, O Christ.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 7): Behold the end of night and dawn of day.* Why have you stood at the grave, O Mary?* Great darkness covered your mind, so you asked the angel:* Where has Jesus been placed?* Behold, the disciples who hastened to the tomb* saw a sign of His resurrection in the burial wrappings and the cloth* and remembered what was said about Him in the Scriptures.* Therefore, we who believe through them* praise You, O Christ, the Giver of life.

Eighth Gospel: Jn. 20:11-18

[At that time,] Mary stayed outside the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she bent over into the tomb and saw two angels in white sitting there, one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been. And they said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping?" She said to them, "They have taken my Lord, and I don't know where they laid Him." When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus there, but did not know it was Jesus. Jesus said to her, "Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?" She thought it was the gardener and said to Him, "Sir, if You carried Him away, tell me where You laid Him, and I will take Him." Jesus said to her, "Mary!" She turned and said to Him in Hebrew, "Rabbouni," which means Teacher. Jesus said to her, "Stop holding on to Me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to My brothers and tell them, 'I am going to My Father and your Father, to My God and your God.'" Mary of Magdala went and announced to the disciples, "I have seen the Lord," and what He told her.

Exapostilarion:
When Mary saw two angels inside the grave,* she was seized with fright.* She did not recognize Christ but thought that He was the gardener;* she said to Him: "Sir, where have You placed the body of Jesus?"* She knew from His voice that He was the Savior,* and she obeyed Him when He said:* "Touch Me not for I am going to My Father.* Tell this to My disciples."

Glory be: Now and for ever: you have given birth, O Virgin,* to one of the Trinity in a manner beyond description,* dual in nature, dual in will, but one in Person.* Therefore, always beseech Him for those who honor you in faith,* that we may escape the temptations of the enemy;* for in you we now seek refuge, O Theotokos.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 8): The warm tears of Mary were not shed in vain;* for behold, she has been worthy to hear the angels* and to behold Your face, O Jesus.* But being a woman still thinking of earthly things,* she was not permitted to touch You, O Christ.* However, she was sent to proclaim to Your disciples the good news announcing Your return to Your heavenly inheritance.* With her, therefore, make us worthy to see You, O Lord.

Ninth Gospel: Jn. 20:19-31

[At that time,] on the evening of the first day of the week, when the doors were locked, where the disciples were, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them, "Peace be with you." When He had said this, He showed them His hands and His side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord. [Jesus] said to them again, "Peace be with you. As the Father has sent Me, so I send you." And when He had said this, He breathed on them and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit. Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them, and whose sins you retain are retained." Thomas called Didymus, one of the Twelve, was not with them when Jesus came. So the other disciples said to him, "We have seen the Lord." But he said to them, "Unless I see the mark of the nails in His hands and put my finger into the nailmarks and put my hand into His side, I will not believe." Now a week later His disciples were again inside and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and stood in their midst and said, "Peace be with you." Then He said to Thomas, "Put your finger here and see My hands, and bring your hand and put it into My side, and do not be unbelieving, but believe." Thomas answered and said to Him, "My Lord and my God!" Jesus said to Him, "Have you come to believe because you have seen Me? Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed." Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of [His] disciples that are not written in this book. But these are written that you may [come to] believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that through this belief you may have life in His name.

Exapostilarion:
Though the doors were locked, O Lord, * You entered and filled Your apostles with the Holy Spirit,* and breathing over them, You gave them Your peace.* You said to them: Whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven;* whose sins you bind, they are bound.* After eight days You showed Thomas Your hands and Your side.* With them, therefore, we cry to You: You are my Lord and my God!

Glory be: Now and for ever: When you beheld your Son risen from the tomb after three days,* O most holy Virgin bride of God, * you put away all sorrow* which you had borne as a Mother when you beheld Him suffering.* Now that your soul is filled with joy* you sing hymns of praise together with the disciples.* Now save those who proclaim you as the Mother of God.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 5): In the fullness of time, O Christ, * You appeared among Your beloved ones on the Sabbath evening.* And through a new wonder, * You confirmed Your resurrection from the dead* by Your entrance while the doors were closed.* You filled the disciples with joy, * granting them the Holy Spirit and bestowing on them power to forgive sins!* As for Thomas, You did not permit him to drown in the depths of faithlessness.* Therefore, grant us the knowledge of the truth* and forgiveness of sins, O compassionate Lord.

Tenth Gospel: Jn. 21: 1-14

[At that time,] Jesus revealed Himself again to His disciples at the Sea of Tiberias. He revealed Himself in this way. Together were Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, Zebedee's sons, and two others of His disciples. Simon Peter said to them, "I am going fishing." They said to him, "We also will come with you." So they went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing. When it was already dawn, Jesus was standing on the shore; but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus. Jesus said to them, "Children, have you caught anything to eat?" They answered Him, "No." So He said to them, "Cast the net over the right side of the boat and you will find something." So they cast it, and were not able to pull it in because of the number of fish. So the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, "It is the Lord." When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he tucked in his garment, for he was lightly clad, and jumped into the sea. The other disciples came in the boat, for they were not far from shore, only about a hundred yards, dragging the net with the fish. When they climbed out on shore, they saw a charcoal fire with fish on it and bread. Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the fish you just caught." So Simon Peter went over and dragged the net to the shore full of one hundred and fifty-three large fish. Even though there were so many, the net was not torn. Jesus said to them, "Come, have breakfast." And none of the disciples dared to ask Him, "Who are You?" because they realized it was the Lord. Jesus came over and took the bread and gave it to them, and in like manner the fish. This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to His disciples after being raised from the dead.

Exapostilarion:
The two sons of Zebedee, with Peter, Nathaniel, and Thomas, and two others were fishing in the Lake of Tiberias.* By the command of Christ, they cast the net on the right side* and drew out many fish.* Peter, recognizing Christ, came swimming toward Him.* This was the third appearance of the Lord after His resurrection.* Then He shared with them bread and fish from the fire.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Virgin, pray to the Lord Who rose from the tomb on the third day* for us Christians who praise and bless you with zeal.* For we have all taken you as a refuge of salvation* and as a mediatrix with Him.* For we are your servants, O Mother of God;* we are the people of your house,* and we all await your protection.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 6): After Your descent into Hades, O Christ,* and Your resurrection from the dead, the disciples grieved over Your departure.* They returned to their occupations* and attended to their nets and their boats,* but their fishing was in vain.* You appeared to them since You are Lord of all;* You commanded them to cast the nets on the right side.* Immediately Your word became deed.* They caught a great number of fish,* and they found an unexpected meal prepared for them on the shore,* which they immediately ate.* Now, make us worthy to enjoy this meal with them in a spiritual manner,* O Lord and Lover of mankind.

Eleventh Gospel: Jn. 21: 15-25

[At that time,] when they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of John, do you love Me more than these?" He said to Him, "Yes, Lord, You know that I love You." He said to him, "Feed My lambs." He then said to him a second time, "Simon, son of John, do you love Me?" He said to Him, "Yes, Lord, You know that I love You." He said to him, "Tend My sheep." He said to him the third time, "Simon, son of John, do you love Me?" Peter was distressed that He had said to him a third time, "Do you love Me?" and he said to Him, "Lord, You know everything; You know that I love You." [Jesus] said to him, "Feed My sheep. Amen, amen, I say to you, when you were younger, you used to dress yourself and go where you wanted; but when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go." He said this signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. And when He had said this, He said to him, "Follow Me." Peter turned and saw the disciple following whom Jesus loved, the one who had also reclined upon His chest during the supper and had said, "Master, who is the one who will betray You?" When Peter saw him, he said to Jesus, "Lord, what about him?" Jesus said to him, "What if I want him to remain until I come? What concern is it of yours? You follow Me." So the word spread among the brothers that that disciple would not die. But Jesus had not told him that he would not die, just "What if I want him to remain until I come? [What concern is it of yours?]" It is this disciple who testifies to these things and has written them, and we know that his testimony is true. There are also many other things that Jesus did, but if these were to be described individually, I do not think the whole world would contain the books that would be written.

Exapostilarion:
After His resurrection the Lord asked Peter three times:* Do you love Me?* Then the Lord set Peter as a shepherd over His sheep.* When Peter saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following Him,* he asked the Lord: What about him?* And the Lord said: If I want him to wait until I come again,* what is that to you, O Peter, My beloved?

Glory be: Now and for ever: What an awesome mystery; what a dazzling wonder!* Death has been abolished completely by death.* O Word, Who then will not praise,* and who will not glorify Your resurrection?* Who will not praise the Theotokos* who gave birth to You in the flesh and in purity?* Therefore, by her prayers, save us all from Hades.

Gospel Stichera - Glory be: (Tone 8): When You showed Yourself to the disciples* after Your resurrection, O Savior, * You appointed Simon to watch over Your sheep* as a recompense for his love; * You asked him to tend the flock with care.* You said to him: If you love Me, O Peter,* feed My lambs and feed My sheep.* But at once he inquired concerning the other disciple,* revealing him to be the beloved.* Therefore, by the intercession of both, O Christ,* keep Your flock from the ravaging wolves.
