--- PAGE 1 ---
THE 2nd SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST 
COMMEMORATION OF ALL SAINTS WHO HAVE  
SHONE FORTH IN THE LAND OF RUSSIA: 
AT GREAT VESPERS 
After the Introductory Psalm, we chant “Blessed is the man ...,” the first antiphon. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera, 4 in Tone I:  
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins; * 
because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward me. 
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to him who 
in her midst hath arisen from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and hath delivered us 
from our iniquities. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear my 
voice. 
Come O ye peoples, * let us hymn and worship Christ * glorifying his 
Resurrection from the dead: * for he is our God, ** who hath redeemed the world 
from the deception of the adversary. 
Another Sticheron, by Anatolius: 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Rejoice, O ye heavens! * Sound the trumpets O ye foundations of the earth! * O 
ye mountains thunder forth your joy! * for behold, Emmanuel hath nailed our sins to 
the Cross, * and the giver of life, hath slain death * raising up Adam, ** for He alone 
is the Lover of mankind. 
The Stichera of the Saints of Russia, three in Tone III: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall stand? * 
For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Tone III: Come, ye assemblies of Russia, * let us praise the saints that are in our 
land. * The venerable, the holy hierarchs, the right-believing princes, the martyrs, 
hieromartyrs, * the fools for Christ’s sake, and the company of holy women. * Both 
those known by name and those unknown; * for truly by their deeds and words, and 
their manifold ways of life, * and through the gifts of God, they became saints, * and 
God hath glorified even their graves with miracles. * And now, standing directly 
before Christ Who hath glorified them, ** they pray fervently on behalf of us who 
celebrate their radiant festival with love.  
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my soul 
hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Tone III: With what beauties of hymnody shall we praise the divinely wise 
hierarchs of Russia, * the splendid adornments of the Church of Christ, * the crowns 
of the priesthood, the rule of piety, the inexhaustible well-springs of divine healing, * 
the outpouring of the gifts of the Spirit, * the rivers of manifold miracles which 
gladden the land of Russia with their flow, * the fervent helpers of pious peoples, * 
for whose sake Christ, Who hath great mercy, ** hath cast down the uprisings of the 
enemy.  
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Tone III: Earth is glad and heaven rejoiceth, O venerable fathers, * praising your 
feats and labors, your spiritual fortitude and purity of mind; * for ye were not 
overcome by the law of nature. * O holy company and divine assembly, ** ye are truly 
the confirmation of our land.  
And three in Tone VIII: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Tone VIII: O blessed and divinely wise princes of Russia, * who shine forth with 
Orthodox wisdom, * and are resplendent with the brilliance of the virtues: * Ye 
illumine all the faithful, driving away the darkness of the demons. * Wherefore, we 
honor you as partakers of never-waning grace * and unashamed preservers of your 
heritage, ** O right wondrous ones.  
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Tone VIII: O most blessed martyrs of Christ, * ye gave yourselves over to 
voluntary sacrifice, * have sanctified the land of Russia with your blood, * and have 
brought splendor even unto the air by your repose; * and now ye dwell in the heavens 
amid never-waning light, ** ever praying on our behalf, O ye beholders of God. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of the 
Lord abideth forever. 
Tone VIII: The corrections of your virtues have enlightened the hearts of the 
faithful, * O fools for Christ’s sake and ye righteous, * who have shone forth in 
Russia; * for who hath heard of your boundless humility and forbearance, and not 
marveled? * The needs of all did ye anticipate, O right-wondrous ones: * ye were an 
example of meekness and guilelessness for all, * of pity for the sorrowful, of speedy 
aid to those in misfortune, * an untroubled haven for those at sea, and good speed for 
travelers. * And now ye have been crowned with unfading wreaths by the hand of the 
omnipotent God. ** Him do ye entreat, that our souls be saved. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Rejoice in the Lord O thou Orthodox Russia, * dance now and be glad, * for thou 
art radiantly adorned with the faith, * having within thy loins, like a precious dowry, * 
venerable ascetics who struggled for the faith, * and witnessed to the truth,* take 
pleasure in the miracles that flow forth from them, * and beholding such a multitude 
of saints, * who encompass and protect thee from enemies visible and invisible, * cry 
out with thanksgiving unto the Savior: ** O Lord glory be to Thee. 
Both now ..., the Dogmaticon in Tone II: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and who 
gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn of the 
Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been revealed as the 
heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle wall, she hath 
brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore, holding fast to 
her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion the Lord born 
from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of God; ** for as the 
Invincible one He shall conquer our adversaries. 
Entrance. Prokeimenon of the day. Three Lessons: 
READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (49: 8-15) 
Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of 
salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of 
the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; That thou 
mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. 
They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places. They shall 
not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath 
mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. And 
I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. Behold, these 
shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from 
the land of Sinim. Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into 
singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy 
upon his afflicted. But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath 
forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have 
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. 
 READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: but they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: for 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 

--- PAGE 4 ---
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: and such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath 
care for His elect. 
READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care 
of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of a helmet. 
He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a 
sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-
aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall 
they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, 
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, 
And these Stichera to the saints, in Tone VIII: 
Rejoice with us, all ye choirs of saints and ranks of angels, * spiritually gathered 
together; * and let us come and chant a hymn of thanksgiving unto Christ our God. * 
For, lo! the countless assembly of our kinsmen, * who have been well-pleasing unto 
God, * standeth before the King of glory, and with entreaty mediateth for us. * They 
are the pillars and beauty of the Orthodox Faith; * they have glorified the Church of 
God with their ascetic feats and the shedding of their blood, * with their teachings 
and deeds; * they have confirmed the Faith of Christ with miracles and signs; * they 
have shone forth from all the regions of our land, * have established the Orthodox 
Faith therein, * and with apostolic zeal have brought it even unto other lands. * 
Others have adorned the wilderness and the cities with holy monasteries, * 
manifesting an angelic life. * Many have been subjected to trials through mockery, * 
wounding and cruel death by the children of this age. * And many have struggled in 
other ways, in every class. * And all pray to the Lord, that He deliver our homeland 
from tribulations, ** and that we all may be saved.  
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII:  
All the noetic ranks rejoice with us, * joining in spiritual chorus. * They have seen 
the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all, * glorified by the faithful with many names. * 
And all the souls of the righteous, beholders of the sight, * rejoice to see her in the air 
stretching forth her most precious hands in supplication, * entreating peace for the 
world, * confirmation for the land of Russia, ** and salvation for our souls.  
On the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I: 
By thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by thy 
Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be to thee. 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
All ye His creation rejoice! * let the heavens be glad, * let the nations clap their 
hands with gladness; * for Christ our Savior hath nailed our sins to the Cross * and by 
slaying death hath granted us life eternal, * raising all of the fallen race of Adam, ** as 
he alone is the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
Being the King of heaven and earth, * O Incomprehensible one, * Thou wast 
willingly crucified through Thy love for mankind; * when Hades met thee he was 
vexed, * while the souls of the righteous receiving thee below rejoiced, * and Adam, 
seeing thee his Creator in the nethermost regions, rose again. * O the wonder! * How 
did the life of all taste death? * Except that he wished to enlighten the world, * which 
crieth out saying: * “O Thou who didst arise from the dead, ** O Lord glory be to 
thee!” 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days. 
Carrying sweet spices the myrrh-bearing women * reached thy tomb with haste, 
lamenting; * and not finding thy most pure Body, * but learning from the angel the 
new and marvelous wonder, * spake unto the apostles saying: * The Lord hath arisen, 
** granting the world His great mercy. 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: (According to Lambertson) 
Celebrating the yearly commemoration of our holy kinsmen, * let us call them 
blessed, as is meet; * for they have truly passed through all the beatitudes of the Lord: 
* impoverished, they have become rich in spirit; * being meek, they have inherited the 
land of the meek; * having wept, they have found comfort; * having thirsted after 
righteousness, they have been filled; * having had mercy upon others, they have 
found mercy themselves; * pure of heart, they have seen God, as far as such is 
possible; * peace-makers, they have been counted worthy of adoption by God; * and 
persecuted and tormented for piety and righteousness’ sake, * they now rejoice and 
are glad in the heavens; * and they earnestly entreat the Lord, ** that He take pity on 
our homeland.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: (According to Lambertson) 
Let us sound the clarion of hymns! * Together let us chant unto the Theotokos 
and Queen, the helper of our land: * Rejoice, O thou who from ages past hast 
crowned our homeland with thy benevolence * and pourest forth thy grace thereon! * 
Wherefore, our Church of Russia doth celebrate with splendor * thine all-honored 
protecting veil and the memory of thy miracles wrought thereby. * Take not thy 
mercy away from us now, O Sovereign Lady; * but look down upon our sorrows and 
oppression, ** and raise us up by thy mighty assistance.  
“Rejoice O Virgin Theotokos ...” (Twice) 
Troparion to all Saints of Russia, in Tone VIII: 
The land of Russia doth offer Thee, O Lord, all the saints who have shone forth 
in it, * as the beauteous fruit of Thy salvific splendor. * By their supplications and 
through the Theotokos preserve Thou the Church ** and our land in profound 
peace, O greatly Merciful One. (Once)  

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I: 
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * and the soldiers were guarding 
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting life 
unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the heavens cried out to Thee, O Life-
giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. ** Glory to 
Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Troparion of the Saints, in Tone VIII: 
The land of Russia doth offer Thee, O Lord, all the saints who have shone forth in 
it, * as the beauteous fruit of Thy salvific splendor. * By their supplications and 
through the Theotokos preserve Thou the Church ** and our land in profound 
peace, O greatly Merciful One.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the Resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. II), the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
While watching Thy grave, the soldiers * became as dead men from the lightning 
flash of the angel * who appeared and proclaimed to the Women the Resurrection. * 
We glorify Thee, the destroyer of corruption; * we fall down before Thee, * who hath 
risen from the grave ** and who alone art our God. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; forget not Thy 
paupers to the end. 
Thou wast willingly nailed to the Cross, * O Compassionate one, * and laid in a 
tomb as a mortal, * O Giver of life. * By Thy death, O Powerful one, * Thou hast 
smashed its might; * for Hades’ gatekeepers trembled before Thee; * Thou hast raised 
with Thee the dead from every age, ** for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
All we who with love flee for refuge to thy goodness * know thee to be the 
Mother of God * and after childbirth still truly Virgin; * for we sinners have thee as 
our protection; * we have thee as our salvation in misfortunes, ** as the only all-
immaculate one. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. III), the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
The women came to Thy tomb at dawn * and seeing a vision of an angel they 
trembled; * the tomb became resplendent with life; * and amazed by the miracle, * 
they returned to the disciples and proclaimed the Resurrection: * for Christ hath 
despoiled Hades, * as alone almighty and all powerful, * raising up those in 
corruption, * dispelling the fear of condemnation ** by the power of the Cross. 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all Thy 
wonders. 
O Life of all, Thou wast nailed to the Cross; * O immortal Lord, Thou wast 
numbered among the dead, * arising on the third day, O Savior, * raising Adam from 
corruption; * wherefore the heavenly Powers cried out to Thee: * “O Giver of life, * 
Glory to Thy sufferings, O Christ; * glory to Thy Resurrection; * glory to Thy 
condescension, ** O only Lover of mankind.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Mary, holy tabernacle of the Master, * raise us up who have fallen into the pit 
of wicked despair, * of transgressions and afflictions; * for thou art the salvation, * 
the help and the mighty protection of sinners, ** and thou dost save thy servants. 
Polyeleos & Magnification: We magnify you, * O all ye saints * who have 
shone forth in the land of Russia, * and we honor your holy memory; ** for ye 
entreat Christ our God on our behalf.  
Selected Psalm Verses: 
A: Our God is our refuge and strength, a helper in afflictions which mightily 
befall us.  
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead, * O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself raising up 
Adam, ** and freeing all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus the 
radiant angel within the tomb * addressed the myrrh-bearing women; * behold the 
tomb and understand, ** for the Savior is risen from the tomb. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, * 
but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, weep 
not, ** but tell of the Resurrection to the apostles. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, bewailing, 
* but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living among the dead, 
* for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy Trinity, 
* one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, Amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O Virgin, 
* and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from life * have 
thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the little Litany, and the Sessional Hymn, in tone I: 
The Thief’s repentance plundered Paradise, * but the myrrh-bearers’ lamentations 
announced the joy that Thou hast risen, * O Christ God, ** granting the world great 
mercy. 
Sessional Hymns for the Saints, in Tone V: (According to Lambertson) 
Having been illumined with the lightning-flashes of the saints, * as though 
entering a beautiful paradise * we have found delight in a torrent of sweetness; * and 
gazing in wonder at their valorous feats, * let us come to love their virtues, * crying 
out to the Savior: * Through their supplications, O God, ** grant us a share in Thy 
kingdom!  
Like the radiant sun, like the brilliant morning-star, * the honored day of the 
memorial of the saints * who have shone forth in the land of Russia hath dawned, * 
illumining all of us and rousing our hearts ** to emulate their godly life and their zeal 
for the Faith.  
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
All the faithful people of Russia * celebrate on the day of the commemoration of 
Thy saints, O Lord. * The heavens rejoice and the ends of our earth are glad. ** 
Through their supplications grant our souls great mercy.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
Looking down from the highest, * O most merciful Master, visit us who have been 
afflicted by sin, taking unto Thyself the wretched; and through the supplications of 
the Theotokos and all the saints of Russia, grant unto our souls great mercy.  
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Song of Ascents, 1st Antiphon, in Tone I: 
When I am afflicted, * I cry unto Thee, O Lord, ** hearken unto my pains. 
For those who dwell in the desert * the longing for God never ceaseth, ** for they 
are far from the vanity of this world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
To the Holy Spirit, as to the Father and the Son, * are due honor and glory; ** 
thus let us sing to the Trinity, a single power. 
2nd Antiphon: 
Having lifted me up to the summit of Thy laws, * make me to shine with virtues, 
O God, ** that I may sing Thy praises. 
Take me with Thy right hand, O Word, * guard me and keep me, ** lest the fire 
of sin scorch me. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit all creation is renewed, * and hasteneth back to its original 
condition; ** for He is equal in strength to the Father and the Word. 
3rd Antiphon: 
With those who said unto me: * “Let us journey to the courts of the Lord,” ** my 
Spirit was gladdened and my heart rejoiceth. 
In the house of David is great fear; * for when the thrones are set therein, ** all 
the tribes and nations of the earth will be judged. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
To the Holy Spirit must be offered honor, adoration, glory and power, * as befits 
also the Father and the Son; ** for the Trinity is a Unity, one in essence, but not in 
hypostases. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: Now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will establish them 
in salvation, * I will be manifest therein. 
The Verse: The words of the Lord are pure words, silver that is fired, tried in 
the earth, brought to sevenfold purity. 
Let every breath ...,  
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (16:1-8) 
At that time, the Sabbath having past: Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of 
James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him. 
And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they came unto the sepulcher 
at the rising of the sun. And they said among themselves. Who shall roll us away the 
stone from the door of the sepulcher? And when they looked, they saw that the stone 
was rolled away: for it was very great. And entering into the sepulcher, they saw a 

--- PAGE 11 ---
young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were 
affrighted. And he saith unto them. Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, 
which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him. 
But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: 
there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. And they went out quickly, and fled from 
the sepulcher; for they trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any 
man; for they were afraid. 
Then, in Tone VI: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord Jesus, * 
the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath come to 
all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * for, having 
endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the multitude 
of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, ** 
and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” The Canons: 
Canon of the Resurrection with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; the canon to the 
Theotokos with 2 Troparia; and the Canon to all saints of Russia with 8 Troparia. 
ODE I 
Irmos: Thy triumphant right hand, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it broke into 
pieces the enemy, * and hath made a strange new way for the Israelites 
through the deep. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
As God, working with exceedingly pure hands, Thou hast fashioned me in the 
beginning from dust, and now stretching out those hands on the Cross, Thou didst 
recall from the earth my corruptible body, which Thou hast taken from the Virgin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
He, who by divinely breathing upon me placed a soul in me, hath willingly 
submitted to be slain for me and thus, having delivered his soul to death, hath freed 
my soul from the eternal bonds, raising it with Himself, and glorifying it with 
incorruption. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice! source of grace, Rejoice! ladder and gate of heaven, Rejoice! 
lamp-stand and golden jar, the un-hewn mountain, that bore unto the world, Christ 
the Giver of life. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
What hymn worthy of thee can our weakness offer unto thee? If not only the 
joyful one Gabriel revealed unto us: “Rejoice! O Theotokos, Virgin Mother who 
knewest not wedlock!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Unto the Ever-virgin and Mother of the King of the highest Powers, let us the 
faithful cry in spirit from hearts most pure: “Rejoice! O Theotokos, Virgin Mother 
who knewest not wedlock!” 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
In spiritual songs let us all hymn together our godly fathers who have shone forth 
in piety, whom every place and region of the land of Russia hath brought forth, and 
whom the Church of Russia hath nurtured.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Come all ye faithful who love the martyrs, and with hymns let us honor the 
martyrs of Russia, Theodore, and the youth John, who refused to worship the idols, 
shedding their blood for Christ. 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Rejoice, O ye seven holy hierarchs - Basil, Ephraim, Eugene, Elpidius, 
Agathadorus, Eutherius and Capito - who were bishops in Cherson and hallowed our 
land with your blood!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Thou art our greatness and boast, O divinely wise Olga; for by thee were we freed 
from the deception of idolatry. Pray thou now for the people whom thou hast led to 
God.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Rejoice and be glad, O servant of Christ, great and wise Prince Vladimir, 
intercessor for our souls, for by thee have we all been delivered from the deception of 
the demons. Wherefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice!  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Michael, the hierarch of God, shineth like a star in heaven, who illumined the land 
of Russia with the light of the knowledge of the divine Faith and led to the Master a 
new people, reborn in the font of baptism.  
Glory ..., O blessed passion-bearers of Christ, Boris and Gleb: forget not thy 
homeland. Dispel from it famine and affliction, and deliver us, who set our hope on 
you, from civil strife and every sinful fall.  
 Both now ..., With the ranks of the angels, O Sovereign Lady, with the honorable 
and glorious prophets, the pre-eminent apostles and hieromartyrs, and with the 
archangels, pray thou to God on behalf of us sinners, who in the land of Russia have 
glorified the feast of thy protecting veil.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of mortals * and in compassion took 
their form; * gird me with power from on high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * 
Holy is the living temple of Thine ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
As Thou art my God, O Good one, Thou hast taken compassion upon me, fallen 
as I was, deigning to come down to me, and exalting me through Thy crucifixion that 
I may cry unto Thee: “Holy art Thou the Lord of glory, in goodness beyond 
compare!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
O Christ, as the hypostatic Life and as compassionate God, Thou hast clothed 
Thyself with me, the corrupted one, descending, O Master, unto the dust of death, 
destroying the power of death, and arising on the third day, whereby Thou hast 
clothed me with incorruption. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having conceived God in thy womb, O Virgin, by the most holy 
Spirit, thou hast remained unburnt, like the bush that burned before Moses the 
lawgiver yet remained unconsumed, clearly foretelling thee who received the 
unendurable fire. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Truthfully, O Virgin, following the words of the prophet, we name thee the light 
cloud; for from thee the Lord hath come to overthrow the idols of Egypt, made by 
men, and to enlighten those who served them. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The choir of prophets hath truly named thee the sealed fountain and the shut 
gate, clearly depicting for us the symbols of thy virginity, O all-hymned one, which 
Thou didst preserve even after childbirth. 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
The sacred and great Lavra, which was founded by thee, O venerable father 
Anthony, first of all the monks of Russia, most gloriously preacheth and soundeth 
forth more loudly than a trumpet; and the house of the Mother of God doth glory in 
splendor, chanting unto God: by Thee have I been established, O Lord.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Let us radiantly hymn the blessed Theodosius, eminent in miracles and great in 
the virtues, the founder of the coenobitic monastic life in Russia, the glorious favorite 
of Christ and the Theotokos; and with him Nestor, the recorder of memorable 
events, and Alypius, the first iconographer in Russia.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Thou art a noetic paradise, O holy Mountain of the Caves, who produced a 
multitude of spiritual trees - the blessed fathers, whose number it is not possible to 
reckon individually. We therefore offer praise and hymnody to the one Master for all 
of them together.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O martyr Anthony and steadfast Eustathius, together with John, ye adornment of 
the Lithuanian land, who set at naught the arrogance of Olgerd: Quench ye the 
passions which mortify me!  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Be ye intercessors for your earthly homeland and for the city wherein ye struggled 
in martyrdom, O venerable-martyr Athanasius, and thou, O young Gabriel. And teach 
us also to confess Orthodoxy with boldness and not to fear the enemy.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Let the venerable Job be honored, the adornment of the Lavra of Pochaev, 
together with all the wonderworkers and saints of Volyn, who have illumined the 
ends of our land with their deeds and miracles.  
Glory ..., With sacred hymns let us praise Athanasius, the holy bishop of 
Constantinople, who brought his own precious relics, as an earnest of unity with the 
universal Church, to be a blessing for the land of Russia, and hath left them to us.  
 Both now ..., Lo! the time for the assistance of the most holy Theotokos is come, 
for temptations have multiplied. Behold! now is the time for us to sigh unto her, O 
brethren! Let us therefore say with our whole heart: O Sovereign Lady, O Sovereign 
Lady, help thou thy people.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory. 
Kontakion of All Saints of Russia, in Tone III: 
Today the choir of the saints * who have pleased God * in our land standeth forth 
in the Church * and invisibly prayeth to God for us. * With them the angels give 
glory, * and all the saints of the Church of Christ * celebrate with them; ** for all 
together they entreat the pre-eternal God for us.  
Ikos: Fruitful trees of the Garden of Eden, laden with goodly fruit, have the saints 
been shown to be, producing the sweet-smelling blossoms of doctrine and the fruits 
of good works: whereby our souls are fed, and our spiritual hunger is assuaged. Come 
ye, therefore, let us hasten beneath their shadow and bless them as the delight and 
adornment of our land, and as a model and pattern for our life; for they have received 
imperishable crowns from the pre-eternal God.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
 Christ, the Sun of righteousness, * set you forth as rays illumining the land of 
Russia, * O favored ones of God, * enlightening our race. * Wherefore, with your 
divine entreaties, * O blessed ones of God, ** make radiant my darkened soul.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O ye faithful, let us make haste * to the divine and healing robe of God our 
Savior, * Whose good pleasure it was to assume this flesh * and to shed His own holy 
Blood upon the Cross, * and thereby redeemed us from slavery to the enemy. * 
Wherefore, we cry out to Him in thanksgiving: * Save Thou our Orthodox episcopate 
and this city, * and with Thy precious robe defend all the people and save our souls, 
** in that Thou lovest mankind.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habbakuk with foreseeing eyes * perceived thee as a mountain 
overshadowed by the grace of God, * from which, he foretold, * the Holy one 
of Israel would come, * for our salvation and refashioning. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Who is this Savior that cometh from Edom, wearing a crown of thorns, His 
garments reddened, and hanging upon a tree? He is the Holy one of Israel, who hath 
come for our salvation and restoration. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Behold, O ye disobedient people, and be ashamed! For He, whom ye in your 
madness begged Pilate to hang upon a cross as a malefactor, hath abolished the 
power of death, and in a manner befitting God, arisen from the tomb. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We know thee to be the tree of life, O Virgin; for it was not the fruit 
which bringeth death that budded from thee, but rather the delight of eternal life and 
the salvation of us who hymn thee. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Hear wonders, O heaven, take note, O earth, for a daughter of the earthly, fallen 
Adam hath been declared the Mother of God and of her Creator, for our salvation 
and restoration. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
We praise thy great and awesome mystery; for unknown to the Commanders of 
the armies beyond this world, the One Who hath descended upon thee, like dew 
upon the fleece, O All-praised one, hath done so for our salvation and restoration. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O divinely blessed prince Daniel, the Lord showed thee forth as the founder and 
first prince of the city of Moscow. Praying unceasingly to him, save thou the city of 
Moscow and all the land of Russia from tribulation, and in thy mercy visit its 
Orthodox people.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
We entreat you, O holy hierarchs of Christ - Peter, Alexis, Jonah and Philip - and 
all the rest of the wonderworkers of Moscow, to still the turmoil of our spirit and the 
tempest of grief, and by your supplications to God grant us serenity.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
A primate of the apostolic Church, a confessor of the Orthodox Faith, a second 
Chrysostom in denouncing the sin-loving and seditious, and a builder of the 
Orthodox kingdom wast thou, O holy hierarch Hermogenes; and for this thou wast 
tormented with imprisonment and starvation and hast received from God an 
imperishable crown.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Today the glorious city of Moscow rejoiceth, and all Russia is filled with gladness; 
and thine honored monastery, O divinely blessed Sergius, boasting, is adorned, 
possessed of thy precious relics as an inexhaustible and all-wondrous treasure.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
With sacred hymns let us praise the venerable Nikon, the lover of obedience; and 
with him let us also hymn Stephen, Sabbas, Andronicus, and all the venerable 
disciples and companions of the great Sergius, by whose supplications the children of 
Russia are saved.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
We entreat you, O blessed and most wise ones - Basil, Maximus and John of 
Moscow, and all the fools for Christ’s sake in Russia, who were wondrous in the 
manner of your life and understanding: Beseech Christ our God on behalf of your 
earthly homeland, and beg salvation for all the faithful.  
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Glory ..., The venerable Tichon showed himself to be a new piller-dweller in the 
regions of Kaluga, with his faithful and fervent disciple Pathanutius, and the blessed 
Laurence revealed the difficult path of faith to those of his country, saving them, and 
us, by his holy prayers. 
Both now ..., The likeness of the image of the Iveron Icon not only illumineth 
sacred Athos, but it also adorneth the city of Moscow, and other towns and villages 
with its effulgence, being a fount of healing to all those who turn to it entreating 
miraculous aid, and a good gatekeeper, opening unto us the gates of heaven. 
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ, who hast enlightened the ends of the world * by the 
brightness of Thy coming, * and made them radiant by Thy Cross, * enlighten 
with the light of Thy divine knowledge * the hearts of those who sing Thy 
praises with right belief. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The Jews put to death on the Tree of the Cross the great shepherd and Lord; but 
from death’s might He hath rescued like sheep the dead buried in Hades. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou didst announce the glad tidings of peace by Thy cross and proclaimed 
deliverance for captives, O my Savior, then didst Thou, O Christ, put to shame him 
who held them captive revealing him as naked and destitute by Thy divine arising. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O all-hymned one, despise not the prayers of those who faithfully 
entreat thee, but accept them, O Pure one, and convey them to thy Son, our God and 
only benefactor; for in thee we have acquired a protectress. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Beholding thee, the Powers of heaven are made glad, and with them rejoiceth the 
assemblies of mortals; for they have been united, O Virgin Theotokos, by thine 
offspring; whom we worthily glorify. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Let every mortal tongue and mind be roused to the praise of mortal man’s true 
adornment; the Virgin clearly standeth by the Lord, glorifying those who with faith 
sing the praises of her wonders. 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O first pastors of Novgorod the Great - Nicetas, John and Gregory, Theoctistus, 
Euthymius and Serapion - in the house of the Wisdom of God ye flourished like 
palm-trees in your right-fruitful words and blameless lives.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
With splendor let the princes of Novgorod be praised: Vladimir, who erected the 
most marvelous Cathedral of the Holy Wisdom, and his mother Anna, and Mstislav 
and Theodore; and with them let all who shone forth in their God-pleasing life from 
the generation of the princes of Russia be hymned with divine songs.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Who among mortals can glorify as is meet the wondrous Barlaam, the adornment 
of Novgorod, the beacon of all Russia, and Anthony, who traveled from Rome on a 
stone, over the waves of the sea? And Savva, and Ephraim, and Michael, worthily 
praised among the earthborn.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Come ye, let us behold the ever-living and divinely-blossoming flowers of the 
Garden of Eden: the struggles of the fathers who shone forth in the region of 
Novgorod, whose husbandman is the Lord alone.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
With songs let us hymn the meek Vsevolod and Dovmont, the unassailable 
ramparts of Pskov, and Nicholas the Blessed, and Cornelius, who enlightened the 
land of Latvia with holy baptism.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Isidore the priest, and with him the assembly of martyrs in Yuriev, the city of 
Estonia, who confessed the Orthodox Faith in the face of the Latins, have passed 
over to the eternal mansions; and standing in splendor before the king of hosts, they 
pray for us who honor their memory.  
Glory..., The god-bearing Avraam, the adornment of Smolensk, Euphrosynia, the 
joy of Polotsk and splendor of virgins, do we bring before Thee, O my Christ, as 
intercessors. For their sake do Thou save us.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
 Both now ..., O thou who art a fervent helper for those who have recourse to 
thee and the hope of the hopeless, as thou wast once to those dwelling in Novgorod 
the great, look now upon the affliction of thy people and reveal to us a sign of thy 
mercy, O most pure one.  
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, 
* and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn 
thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to deliver 
us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * O God save Thy 
people, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the weak. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Through the transgression of the first-formed man, O Lord, we were grievously 
wounded; but by Thy wounds, by which Thou wast afflicted for our sakes, O Christ, 
we have been healed; for Thou art the strength and restoration of the feeble. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou hast led us up from Hades, O Lord, by destroying the all-devouring whale 
of the deep, O All-powerful one, and destroying his power by Thy might; for Thou 
art the life and the light and the resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The Forefathers rejoice in thee, immaculate Virgin, for through thee 
they regain Eden, which they had lost through transgression; for thou art pure both 
before child-bearing and after giving birth.  
 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The heavenly Ranks stand beside thine Offspring like servants, fittingly struck 
with amazement at thy seedless child-bearing, O Ever-virgin; for thou art pure both 
before bearing child and after giving birth. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Word, who before was without flesh, and who made the universe by His will, 
who brought the armies of the Bodiless ones into being out of nothing, as All-
powerful, became incarnate from thee, O Most pure one. 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O venerable Zosimas, Sabbatius and Germanus, who loved Christ: Ye turned 
away from the world in accordance with the Gospel, crossing over to the impassable 
and barren islands of Solovki. And ye accustomed yourselves to all the virtues, 
emulating the wise bee, and became eminent receptacles of the Holy Spirit, O most 
wise ones.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Let us hymn the venerable Tryphon, great in wonders, the enlightener of Kola, 
who shone forth in the uttermost ends of the lands of the north, delivered the people 
from bitter slavery to the demons, and illumined them with holy baptism.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Rejoice, O wilderness which before wast barren and uninhabited, but now dost 
blossom like a lily and is filled with a multitude of monks! Leap up, ye mountains of 
Valaam and all ye groves, praising Sergius and Germanus, together with Arsenius of 
Konev and Alexander of Svir, the all-praised fathers.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Thou didst pass over the rolling deep of this life, having the Mother of God as 
pilot, O venerable Cyril. And thou, O Joseph, boast of Volotsk, and Nilus the un-
acquisitive, who wisely pastured the flocks of your disciples by the still waters and on 
the meadow of abstinence, and dwell now with them invisibly: Pray ye for us who 
keep your memory.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Anthony of Sisk, and Triphon of Vyatsk, like great luminaries illumine the 
assembly of monastics, as does Dimitrius of Priluk, and Amphilochios, and Dionysius 
the boasts of Glinsk, Gregory of Pelshemski, and Paul, Sergius and Cornelius of 
Vologodsk, whose lives radiated the virtues like beams of light.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O venerable Macarius, Barnabas, and Tichon, Abramius and Genadius, and all the 
other fathers of Yaroslavl, having lived in a god-pleasing manner, ye made the 
fastness of the wilderness useful and spiritually profitable, like cities, pouring forth a 
wellspring of healings upon those who with faith honor you, wherefore we bless and 
entreat you to beseech the Lord that we be not deprived of the vision of God which 
ye now eternally enjoy in the kingdom of heaven.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Glory..., Join chorus, O Russian Thebaid! Adorn yourselves, O wilderness and 
forests of Olonetz, Belozersk and Vologda, which produced a holy and glorious 
multitude of fathers, who by their wondrous life instruct all not to cleave unto the 
world, but to take their cross upon their shoulders and follow after Christ.  
 Both now ..., Of old, the Creator of all wrought a wonder through thy most 
precious icon, O Virgin, and saved the Imperial City from the incursion of aliens. 
Thus be thou now also a protection and aid for the land of Russia, O Lady and 
Queen, saving it from all the assaults of the enemy.  
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O 
ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Kontakion of the Resurrection, in Tone I: 
Thou didst arise from the grave in glory as God * and thus raised up the world 
with Thee; * and mortal nature singeth Thy praises as God, * and death hath 
disappeared; * Adam danceth, O Master, * and now Eve, freed from her chains, * 
rejoiceth as she cries aloud: ** It is Thee, O Christ, who grantest the Resurrection to 
all. 
Ikos: Let us praise as God all-powerful the One who hath risen on the third day, 
smashing the gates of Hades and rousing the age-long dead from the grave, who hath 
appeared to the myrrh-bearers, as it was His good pleasure to say to them first: 
Rejoice! and thus revealing joy to the apostles, as alone the Giver of life. Therefore 
with faith the Women proclaim the tokens of victory to the Disciples; Hades 
groaneth, Death lamenteth, the world exulteth and all rejoice together; for Thou, O 
Christ, hast granted the Resurrection to all. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: We the faithful recognize thee, * O Theotokos, * as a spiritual furnace; 
for as He, * the highly exalted One, * saved the three Youths, * so hath He 
wholly refashioned me, fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The earth did shudder, the sun was hidden, and light was enveloped in darkness, 
the sacred veil of the Temple was rent in twain and the rocks were rent asunder; for 
the Just One hath tasted death upon the cross; O Thou praised and supremely 
glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou, the highly exalted one, didst willingly became as one helpless and 
slain among the dead for our sakes, Thou didst set us all free, and with a lofty arm, 
didst raise us up together with Thee, O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of 
our fathers. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, spring of eternal water! Rejoice, Paradise of delight! Rejoice, 
wall of the faithful! Rejoice, Bride who kneweth not wedlock! Rejoice, joy of all the 
world! through whom the praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers hath 
dawned upon us. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Jacob prophetically discerned thee in the ladder, O Theotokos; for through thee 
the Highly Exalted One was well-pleased to appear and make His abode among us: O 
Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Rejoice, Adam’s most revered fleece! The Shepherd, the highly exalted One, came 
forth from thee, truly clothed in my whole nature, through His ineffable compassion: 
O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Let Leontius, Isaiah and Ignatius, James and Theodore, the precious vessels of the 
Spirit and honored adornment of Rostov, Abramius, the valiant scourge of the 
demons, and the other Joasaph, who shone forth in Russia, Peter, the scion of royalty, 
and Heirinarchus, the voluntary sufferer, be hymned with the other godly 
wonderworkers of Rostov.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
After God, ye are the helpers and protectors of the city of Vladimir: O valorous 
Alexander, conqueror of the Swedes; George, who laid down thy life in battle for the 
Church of God and the people; Andrew, builder of the Russian nation, with the 
chaste Gleb, and thou, O venerable Abramius, who like the merchant of the Gospel 
purchased the kingdom of heaven with thy sufferings. Guide us to the haven of 
salvation, for ye are the bulwark of the faithful.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Glory be to John and Theodore, the luminaries of Suzdal! And with them let 
Euthymius also be hymned, who was great in ascetic struggles, the companion of the 
great Sergius, and also Euphrosynia, the all-radiant star of Suzdal, with them Cosmas 
who struggled on the banks of the Acheron river. 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Let Nicetas be honored, the model of repentance, who struggled ascetically on a 
pillar and received death at the hands of his kinsmen; and Daniel, the burier of the 
dead; and with them also Andrew, who forsook the glory of the princely rank and 
finished his life in poverty: the wonderworkers of Pereyaslavl.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O Constantine, apostle and enlightener of the land of Murom, together with thy 
noble offspring Theodore and Michael; and thou, O valiant and pious Peter, 
vanquisher of the serpent of pride, with thy wise spouse Fevronia and the righteous 
and merciful Juliana: Entreat Christ on our behalf.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O holy hierarch Arsenius, boast of Tver; Michael, prince and martyr, and Anna, 
treasure of the city of Kashin; venerable Nilus and Macarius, Ephraim, enlightener of 
the city of Torzhok, with Arcadius and Juliana: O blossoms of chastity: Entreat Christ 
on our behalf!  
Glory ..., With the sword of your supplications, O right-believing and venerable 
princes Theodore, David and Constantine, ye vanquished the demons and received 
from heaven the grace to heal illnesses and to expel evil spirits from those who cry 
out: O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!  
 Both now ..., Likened to a grace-filled treasury, thou hast granted us thy holy 
Vladimir Icon, which our venerable fathers have often, and in many ways, turned to 
for aid. Turn not away from us now O Mother of God, but assuage and save the land 
of Russia from all those who treat us wickedly. 
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite Youths shone brighter 
than gold * with the beauty of godliness as they exclaimed: * All ye His works 
bless ye the Lord, * praise and supremely exalt him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Word of God, Thou Who by Thy will maketh and transformeth all things, by 
Thy Passion Thou hast transformed the shadow of death into everlasting life, 
wherefore we and all Thy works unceasingly praise Thee as Lord, and supremely exalt 
Thee throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
By rising on the third day, O Christ, Thou hast destroyed the misery and 
destruction within the gates and strongholds of Hades. Unceasingly all Thy works 
praise Thee as Lord, and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Let us praise her who without seed and transcending nature brought 
forth Christ the precious pearl from the divine flesh crying aloud: “All ye His works 
bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Let us all hymn the praise of the resplendent Bridal Chamber, from which Christ, 
the Master of all, came forth as a bridegroom, as we sing: “All ye His works bless the 
Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Rejoice!, glorious throne of God! Rejoice! wall of the faithful, through whom 
Christ, the light, hath dawned for those in darkness, who call Thee blest and cry: “All 
ye His works bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Adorn thyself O city of Kazan, having as thine intercessors the venerable hierarch 
Gurius, Barsanuphius, and Herman, who expelled the darkness of falsehood from 
your realm, and John the martyr, with Stephen and Peter, who by martyrdom left 
their earthly homeland for the heavenly. 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Having studied the sacred Scriptures from thy youth, O God-bearing Stephen, 
thou didst cultivate the stony hearts of the people of Perm with the plough of thy 
words; and having sown the divine seed therein, didst bring forth beautiful fruit for 
Christ, as also did those who followed thee; Gerasimus, Pitirim, and John, whose 
prayers overshadow all the land of Russia.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
Be glad, O land of Siberia; for in thee the Lord hath revealed His favored ones: 
the righteous Symeon of Verkhoturya, and the holy hierarchs of Irkutsk: Innocent, 
Sophronius and John, the new and wondrous luminaries and wonderworkers. (Twice) 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Rejoice O land of Iberia, and all the lands of Georgia, be festive Armenia, 
hymning the equal-to-the-apostles Nina, and Tamara, Gregory the Enlightener, and 
many others who confessed the Orthodox faith in the Caucuses, and who now 
entreat Christ God on behalf of our earthly fatherland. 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O divinely wise hierarch Demetrius, recorder of the lives of the saints and good 
lover thereof: by thy supplications show us to be partakers of their glory.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O holy hierarch Metrophanes, first pastor of Voronezh, who showed great 
courage, fearing neither the threats of the Emperor nor death, and who saved thy soul 
in simplicity: Entreat God on our behalf.  
We bless the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the Lord.  
Thou didst gather spiritual treasure from the corrupt world, as a bee gathereth 
sweet honey from ephemeral blooms, O father Tikhon; and therewith thou dost 
sweeten us all.  
Both now ..., We praise thee our fervent intercessor, and we fall down before thy 
precious Icon, by which the newly enlightened have been established in the true faith, 
and the city of Peter, the mother of the cities of Russia, hath been saved; O thou 
great treasury, and most glorious wealth of all our land. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
And then we sing the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat): 
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God 
my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, ** the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable ..., 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * as 
He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The Bush, burning but not consumed, prefigured Thy pure conception, 
O Theotokos. Therefore we now entreat Thee: quench the raging furnace of 
the temptations that beset us, that we may unceasingly magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O how the lawless and disobedient people, having plotted evil, justified the 
ungodly malefactor, but condemned the Just Lord of glory to the Tree! Him do we 
fittingly magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
We glorify Thee O Savior, the blameless Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the 
world, risen on the third day, and Who with the Father and the divine Spirit we 
acknowledge as God, and the Lord of glory, Thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Save Thy people, O Lord, whom Thou hast purchased with Thine 
own precious blood, strengthening all Orthodox Christians against enemies, and 
bestowing peace upon Thy Churches, O Lover of mankind, through the supplications 
of the Theotokos. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Virgin, fulfilling prophecy, thou didst spring from root of David; yet in giving 
birth to the Lord of glory, which hath been foretold by the prophet David, and 
Whom we fittingly magnify, thou hast also glorified him. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
O most pure one, every law of praise is defeated by the majesty of thy glory; yet, 
O Lady, graciously accept from us Thine unworthy supplicants, O Theotokos, the 
praise we offer thee with love. 
Canon of the Saints of Russia: 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O Tikhon, thou righteous enlightener, and joyous angel of the church of Tambov, 
and thou holy hierarch Pitirim, rejoice over your flock and all Russia, for within her a 
new and eternal joy hath blossomed forth, the venerable seraphim, the wondrous 
struggler for our salvation.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O holy hierarchs Theodosius, and Joasaph of Belgorod, ye have been glorified by 
the Lord because of your wondrous lives, wherefore we also glorify you, being 
children of the Orthodox church, in which even till now, the Lord manifests miracles 
upon those servants who glorify them.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O holy hierarch and martyr Joseph, the city of Astrakhan and all the lands of the 
Volga honor and boast in thee, who suffered cruelly for righteousness at the hands of 
godless rebels.  
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O beyond speech, and transcending all praise, are the struggles of the passion-
bearers, for enduring all manner of wickedness and cruelty from transgressors, they 
bore their faith in Christ like a shield, opposing the teachings of this world, wherefore 
we worthily set them forth as examples of patient endurance. 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O the firmness, and the manliness, of the legions of martyrs of Christ, who were 
slaughtered by the godless ones for Christ’s sake! Ye adorn the Orthodox church in 
our land with the blood ye shed, like seeds of the faith freely given to us, wherefore 
ye are now worthily honored with all the saints. 
Refrain: All ye Saints who have shone forth in the Russian Land, pray to God 
for us. 
O all ye great ancestors of ours, known and unknown, named and unnamed, 
manifest and hidden, having reached the heavenly Zion, and received from God an 

--- PAGE 29 ---
abundance of glory, be ye our comforters, for we are all in distress, entreat Him, to 
establish us who have fallen in the faith, and to gather into one, the dispersed, and 
accept from us as a gift, these hymns of praise which we offer unto you. 
Glory..., O most precious Trinity, accept as first-fruits, as choice incense, all the 
saints which Russia hath offered Thee, like the chosen golden crucibles of old, and in 
recent times, those known and unknown; and by their supplications preserve it from 
all harm.  
 Both now ..., O Virgin Full of grace, who hast enriched our cities and villages 
with the images of thy precious countenance, as with traces of sweet fragrance: 
Accept our thanks, and deliver our homeland from cruel misfortunes; for we all 
magnify thee as the almighty protection of our land. 
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-virgin. 
Exapostilarion of the 2nd Resurrection Gospel: 
The myrrh-bearing women * rejoiced when they beheld the great stone rolled 
away from the tomb, * and a young man seated therein on the right side, * addressing 
them and saying: * “Lo, Christ is risen from the dead. * Go and tell His disciples and 
Peter, * that He goeth before you into Galilee unto the mountain, * for there He shall 
appear unto you His friends, ** as He hath foretold you.” 
Glory ..., Exapostilarion for the Saints:  
In hymns let us praise the never-waning luminaries of the land of Russia, the 
initiates of the mysteries of the Word, glorifying Christ Who hath enlightened and 
loveth them, and hath given them to us as helpers amid sorrows.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Prior to thy conception an angel conveyed unto the Virgin the salutation, 
“Rejoice,” * and now, O Christ, an angel hath rolled away the stone from Thy tomb. 
* The one, instead of sorrow, brought tokens of ineffable joy; * the other instead of 
death, heralded Thee the Giver of life ** magnifying Thee and telling of the 
resurrection unto the women and unto Thine apostles.  
On the Praises, 4 Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall be to 
all His saints. 
We sing the praise of Thy saving Passion, * O Christ, ** and we glorify Thy 
Resurrection. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Having endured the Cross, * and destroyed death * and risen from the dead, * 
grant peace to our lives, O Lord, ** as Thou alone art All-powerful. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the multitude 
of His greatness. 
Having despoiled Hades * and raised mankind by Thy Resurrection, O Christ, ** 
grant that with pure hearts we may praise and glorify Thee. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the psaltery 
and harp. 
As we glorify Thy divine condescension, * we praise Thee, O Christ: * For Thou 
wast born of a Virgin, * yet Thou wast not separated from the Father; * as man Thou 
didst suffer and willingly endure the Cross; * arising from the grave, * as though 
coming forth from Thy bridal chamber, * that Thou mightest save the world. ** O 
Lord, glory be to Thee! 
And 4 Stichera of the Saints of Russia, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice O Life-bearing Cross ...”: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and flute. 
Rejoice thou faithful Church of Russia, * Rejoice most glorious right-believing 
Prince Vladimir, * Rejoice Olga thou chosen one, * for ye are our intercessors before 
the Lord most high, * and our foundation in Orthodoxy, * and our establishment in 
the true faith. * Rejoice every place and country and city, * for as citizens which have 
been brought up in the heavenly kingdom, * they have been revealed to be holy 
luminaries shining upon our souls, * emitting rays of miracles, and deeds, and noetic 
signs throughout all the world, * and now pray ye unto Christ God ** that our souls 
be granted great mercy. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of jubilation. 
* Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Rejoice O ye adornments of the land of Russia, * ye unshaken foundations of our 
church, * the glory of the Orthodox, * fount of miracles, * never silent harps of 
loving-kindness, * many faceted luminaries, * instruments of the Holy Spirit, * meek 
and guileless, * adorned with a multitude of virtues, * heavenly men, and earthly 
angels, * true friends of Christ God, ** to Whom pray ye, that we who honor you, be 
granted great mercy. 
Verse: Our God is refuge and strength, * a helper in afflictions which mightily 
befall us. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Come ye unto us, O our heavenly intercessors, * for we are in need of your 
prayerful assistance, * that we be delivered from the wicked tormenting and evil 
intentions of the unbelievers, * from whom we are hounded like prisoners, * often 
moving from place to place, and becoming lost in the precipices and mountains, * 
wherefore take pity on us O all-famed ones, * and grant us refreshment, * calm the 
tempest, and extinguish those who wish us evil, * pray ye unto God, ** that by your 
prayers, our land be granted great mercy. 
Verse: The Lord of hosts is with us, * our helper is the God of Jacob. 
Tone IV: Having listened to the voice of the Gospel * and become enflamed with 
apostolic zeal, * ye made haste to teach the unbelieving heathen, * O divinely blessed 
Kuksha, Leontius, Stephen and Gurius, * equals of the apostles, and thou, O right-
wondrous Innocent, * apostle of the great land of Siberia * and initiator of the 
enlightenment of the new lands beyond the sea. * Wherefore, as is meet, with all the 
others who have labored in preaching the Gospel of Christ, ** ye are called blessed.  
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
With their spices the women attending Mary * made haste unto the tomb, * 
wondering among themselves how they could accomplish their desire. * There they 
beheld the stone rolled away, * and a divine young man calmed the confusion within 
their soul, saying; * “Jesus the Lord is risen. * go therefore unto His disciples and tell 
them to make haste unto Galilee; * there they will see Him resurrected from the dead 
** as the Lord and the Giver of life.”  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took flesh 
from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve set free, * 
death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise we cry: ** 
Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, glory be to 
thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose 
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by 
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 32 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, 10 Troparia: 6 from the Oktoechos, and 4 from ODE III 
of the Canon to the Saints:  
Through food the foe led Adam out of Paradise; but through the Cross Christ led 
back the Thief as he cried: Remember me when Thou comest in Thy kingdom.  
I venerate Thy sufferings and I glorify Thy Resurrection; with Adam and with the 
Thief I cry aloud with radiant voice: Remember me, O Lord, when Thou comest in 
Thy Kingdom. 
Thou wast crucified, O sinless one, and willingly laid in a grave, but Thou didst 
arise as God; raising Adam with Thyself as he cried: Remember me when Thou 
comest in Thy Kingdom. 
Raising the temple of Thy body after Thy burial for three days, O Christ God, 
Thou hast raised with Adam those who came from Adam as they cried: Remember 
me when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. 
The myrrh-bearers came weeping to Thy grave, O Christ God, very early in the 
morning, and found an angel sitting clothed in white, who cried: What seek ye? Christ 
hath arisen, mourn no longer. 
Thine apostles, O Lord, coming to the mountain that Thou, O Savior, hadst 
appointed them, saw Thee and worshipped Thee. And Thou didst send them out to 
teach the nations and baptize the inhabitants therein. 
The sacred and great Lavra, which was founded by thee, O venerable father 
Anthony, first of all the monks of Russia, most gloriously preacheth and soundeth 
forth more loudly than a trumpet; and the house of the Mother of God doth glory in 
splendor, chanting unto God: by Thee have I been established, O Lord.  
Let us radiantly hymn the blessed Theodosius, eminent in miracles and great in 
the virtues, the founder of the coenobitic monastic life in Russia, the glorious favorite 
of Christ and the Theotokos; and with him Nestor, the recorder of memorable 
events, and Alypius, the first iconographer in Russia.  
Glory ..., With sacred hymns let us praise Athanasius, the holy bishop of 
Constantinople, who brought his own precious relics, as an earnest of unity with the 
universal Church, to be a blessing for the land of Russia, and hath left them to us.  
 Both now ..., Lo! the time for the assistance of the most holy Theotokos is come, 
for temptations have multiplied. Behold! now is the time for us to sigh unto her, O 
brethren! Let us therefore say with our whole heart: O Sovereign Lady, O Sovereign 
Lady, help thou thy people.  
 
 

--- PAGE 33 ---
Troparion of the Resurrection, in Tone I: 
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * and the soldiers were guarding 
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting life 
unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the heavens cried out to Thee, O Life-
giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. * Glory to 
Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Troparion of the Saints, in Tone VIII: 
The land of Russia doth offer Thee, O Lord, all the saints who have shone forth 
in it, * as the beauteous fruit of Thy salvific splendor. * By their supplications and 
through the Theotokos preserve Thou the Church * and our land in profound peace, 
O greatly Merciful One.  
Resurrectional Kontakion, in Tone I: 
Thou didst arise from the grave in glory as God * and thus raised up the world 
with Thee; * and mortal nature sings Thy praises as God, * and death hath 
disappeared; * Adam danceth, O Master, * and now Eve, freed from her chains, * 
rejoiceth as she cries aloud: * It is Thee, O Christ, who grantest the Resurrection to 
all. 
Kontakion of All Saints of Russia, in Tone III: 
Today the choir of the saints * who have pleased God * in our land standeth forth 
in the Church * and invisibly prayeth to God for us. * With them the angels give 
glory, * and all the saints of the Church of Christ * celebrate with them; ** for all 
together they entreat the pre-eternal God for us.  
 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: Let Thy mercy be upon us, * O Lord, according as 
we have hoped in Thee.  
Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright. 
The Prokeimenon of the saints: in Tone IV: Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the 
God of our Fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the ages. 
 
EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE ROMANS, (ROM. 2:10-16) 
 Brethren: Glory, honor, and peace, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew 
first, and also to the Gentile: For there is no respect of persons with God. For as 
many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law: and as many as have 
sinned in the law shall be judged by the law; (For not the hearers of the law are just 
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. For when the Gentiles, which 
have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the 

--- PAGE 34 ---
law, are a law unto themselves: Which shew the work of the law written in their 
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while 
accusing or else excusing one another;) In the day when God shall judge the secrets 
of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel. 
EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE HEBREWS, (HEB. 11:33-12:2) 
Brethren: Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained 
promises, stopped the mouths of lions. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the 
edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned 
to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and 
others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better 
resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of 
bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, 
were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being 
destitute, afflicted, tormented; Of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered in 
deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having 
obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: God having provided 
some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect. Wherefore 
seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside 
every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience 
the race that is set before us, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. 
Alleluia in Tone I: O God who givest avengement unto me, and hast subdued 
peoples under me.  
Verse: Who magnifieth the salvation of His king, and worketh mercy for His 
anointed, for David, and for his seed unto eternity.  
Alleluia in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord hearkened unto them. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (MT. 4:18-23) 
At that time; Jesus, was walking by the sea of Galilee, and saw two brethren, 
Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were 
fishers. And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And 
they straightway left their nets, and followed him. And going on from thence, he saw 
other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with 
Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them. And they immediately 
left the ship and their father, and followed him. And Jesus went about all Galilee, 
teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all 
manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people. 
 

--- PAGE 35 ---
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (4:25-5:12) 
 At that time; there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, and 
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond Jordan. And 
seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples 
came unto him: And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are the 
poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for 
they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed 
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. 
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for 
they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children 
of God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be 
exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: 
 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord in the heavens, praise Him in the highest!  
Another Communion Verse for the saints: The Lord taketh pleasure in His 
people, and He shall exalt the meek with salvation. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
 
 
