--- PAGE 1 ---
THIRD SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST  
COMMEMORATION OF ALL NEW MARTYRS OF THE TURKISH YOKE  
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 4 Resurrection Stichera  
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone II: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
Come let us worship God the Word, * begotten of the Father before all 
ages, * incarnate of the Virgin Mary; * for having endured the Cross, He was 
handed over for burial, * as He himself had willed, * and having risen from the 
dead He hath saved me, * the whole man, ** who hath gone astray.  
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Christ our Savior, by nailing the record against us to the Cross * hath 
blotted it out, * and destroyed the might of death. ** We worship His arising on 
the third day. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
With the Archangels let us hymn the Resurrection of Christ; * for He is the 
Redeemer and the Savior of our souls; * and He is coming again * with great 
glory and mighty power ** to judge the world which He hath fashioned. 
Other Stichera, by Anatolius:  
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
An angel proclaimed Thee, the crucified and buried Master, * saying to the 
women; * “Come, see where the Lord lay. * For as He foretold, He hath arisen 
as all-powerful.” * Therefore we worship Thee, the only Immortal One. ** O 
Christ, Giver of life, have mercy on us. 
And 6 Stichera of all the new martyrs of the Turkish yoke, in Tone I: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
O most glorious wonder! * In these latter times martyrs shine forth * and 
dispel the gloom of delusion; * now the Christian Faith is exalted and impiety 
falleth; * the faithful rejoice and hold festival for the newly manifest, * chanting 
to Christ God: ** Thou art the boast and victory of the martyrs, O Almighty!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
O Thy wonders, O Christ! * Men’s feeble nature hath triumphed over the 
principalities and powers of darkness; * the newly revealed passion-bearers are 
numbered with the martyrs of old * for their steadfast confession of the Faith, * 
their valiant endurance of tortures, and their signs and wonders. * Wherefore, in 
them we cry to Thee: ** Thou art the boast and victory of the spiritual athletes, 
O Almighty!  
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * 
let Israel hope in the Lord. 
United by love for Christ, * O right victorious new martyrs, * and having 
Him dwelling within you: * ye suffered for Christ, and Christ suffered in you 
and through you, * as the Head of the Church through His members. * 
Wherefore, your precious relics have become release from sickness for those 
who venerate them with faith. * We cry out to Him Who strengthened you: ** 
Thou art the boast and victory of the passion-bearers, O Almighty!  
 Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Tone IV: Let us come together today, O ye faithful, * and celebrate a 
common festival; * for, lo! new martyrs have appeared among our race, * who 
have boldly preached the Orthodox Faith * and denounced the evil-minded 
descendants ** of Hagar of old.  
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
With sacred hymnody let us praise the valiant new martyrs: * the preservers 
of the Truth and destroyers of falsehood, * who glorified Christ in their 
members * and bore His precious wounds, * who were a spectacle for angels 
and men, ** the fullness of the faithful.  
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Standing in the heavens before the Chief of the martyrs * together with 
those who suffered before for His sake, * O forbearing spiritual athletes, * ye 
have adorned yourselves with glory like unto theirs. * Wherefore, as ye have 
boldness, ** ask peace and great mercy for us.  
 
  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Today have all the martyrs of Christ * who were slain in many places since 
the fall of Constantinople * been shown forth in the firmament of the Church * 
as newly manifest stars. * O ye who love the martyrs, calling them blessed, * let 
us say to them as is meet: * Rejoice, confirmation of piety and silencing of 
impiety! * Rejoice, glory of the Church of the East and shame of the heterodox! 
* Rejoice, ye models of patience and suffering for Christ! * Stand noetically in 
our midst, O invincible ones, * delivering us from tribulations and temptations, 
** and pray for the salvation of our souls.  
 Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone II:  
The shadow of the law hath passed now that grace hath come, * for as the 
bush wrapped in flame was not consumed, * so didst thou bear a Child O 
Virgin * and remained a virgin; * in place of a pillar of fire, the Sun of 
righteousness hath dawned, * instead of Moses, Christ is come, ** the salvation 
of our souls. 
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH:  
 Thus saith the Lord: All the nations are gathered together, and princes shall 
be gathered out of them. Who will declare these things, or who will let them 
bring forth their witnesses, and be justified; and let them hear, and declare the 
truth? Be ye My witnesses, and I too am a witness, saith the Lord God, and My 
servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know, and believe, and understand 
that I am He: before Me there was no other God, and after Me there shall be 
none. I am God; and beside Me there is no Savior. I have declared, and have 
saved; I have reproached, and there was no strange god among you. Ye are My 
witnesses, and I am the Lord God, even from the beginning: and there is none 
that can deliver out of my hands. I will work, and who shall turn it back? Thus 
saith the Lord God Who redeemeth you the Holy One of Israel.  
THE READING IS FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON:  
 The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no 
torment touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: and their 
departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: 
but they are in peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is 

--- PAGE 4 ---
their hope full of immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be 
greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. 
As gold in the furnace hath He tried them and received them as a burnt 
offering. And in the time of their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro 
like sparks among the stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion 
over the people, and their Lord shall reign forever. They that put their trust in 
Him shall understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with 
Him: for grace and mercy is to His saints, and He hath care for His elect.  
THE READING IS FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON:  
 The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the 
care of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious 
kingdom, and a beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand 
shall He cover them, and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to 
Him His jealousy for complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for 
the revenge of His enemies. He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and 
true judgment instead of a helmet. He shall take holiness for an invincible 
shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a sword, and the world shall fight 
with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-aiming thunderbolts go 
abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall they fly to the 
mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the 
water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall 
blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing 
shall overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and 
understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that 
rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of 
the Lord, and sovereignty from the Most High.  
At Litiya: the Sticheron for the temple, then:  
Stichera of the Saints of the Turkish Yoke, in Tone I:  
With gladness rejoice in God, O Church of the East! * Rejoice and dance, O 
chosen bride of Christ, * clasping to thy bosom thy martyrs new and old; * and 
cry out to Christ thy Bridegroom: * “Behold, here am I and the children which 
Thou hast given me, O Lord, * whom I have spiritually begotten through thy 
grace and nourished with the milk of piety, * and whom I have shown to be 
perfect martyrs for Thy name. * Accept their blood as a right acceptable 
sacrifice, * and, showing mercy, free me from the slavery which oppresseth me 
* and from every heresy, ** for Thou hast redeemed me with Thy precious 
blood.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Tone IV: Kings and priests of God have ye become, as is written, O sacred 
new martyrs, * through your steadfast suffering; * kings, in that ye gained 
dominion over the passions of the flesh, * in that ye presented yourselves to 
God as an unblemished sacrifice and a sacred wholeburnt offering. * And now, 
standing in the heavens before Christ, the King of kings and High Priest, ** 
pray ye for the salvation of our souls.  
Tone V: Rejoice, ye multitude of new martyrs, * adornment of the 
Orthodox, newly slain lambs, * champions and preservers of the Faith, * 
unashamed mediators for us before God, * emulators in these latter years of the 
first martyrs, * unshakable towers of endurance! ** Beg ye great mercy for our 
souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
The heavenly mansions of the saints possess your souls, * O martyrs who 
suffered greatly; * and we on earth, possessing your holy relics, * are full of joy, 
drawing forth sanctification and healing of soul and body therefrom. * Glory to 
Thee, O Lord, Who, even in our generation, * hast shown forth passion-bearers 
for the confirmation of the Faith, * the consolation of those held captive, ** 
and the salvation of our souls!  
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * 
Mother of God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-
immaculate one, * granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting 
now our supplications, ** pray thou that we all be saved. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone II: 
Thy Resurrection, O Christ our Savior, * hath enlightened the whole 
universe; * and Thou hast called back Thine own creation. ** O all-powerful 
Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is 
clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Nullifying the curse of the tree through a Tree, O Savior, * Thou didst slay 
the might of death by Thy burial, * enlightening our race by Thine arising; * 
wherefore we cry out to Thee; * “O Giver of life, Christ our God, ** glory be to 
Thee!” 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Appearing nailed to the Cross, O Christ, * Thou hast altered the beauty of 
all created things; * and while the soldiers showed their inhumanity by piercing 
Thy side with a lance, * the Hebrews asked that Thy tomb be sealed, * not 
understanding Thy power; * but in Thy merciful compassion Thou didst accept 
burial and rise on the third day. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days. 
For the sake of mortal mankind, * O Christ Giver of life, * Thou didst 
willingly endure the Passion; * and as all-powerful Thou didst descend into 
Hades, * snatching from the hand of the mighty one * the souls of those who 
awaited therein Thy coming * granting them to dwell in Paradise instead of 
Hades, * grant also unto us who glorify Thine arising on the third day ** the 
pardon of our iniquities and Thy great mercy.  
 Glory ..., in Tone IV: 
Today hath the noetic spring broken forth amid the winter of a captivity in 
suffering, * composed of scores and scores of new martyrs, * those known by 
name, and other whose names are unknown. * Wherefore, come ye who love 
their feast, * and, entering into the sight of their right laudable struggles as into 
a garden replete with flowers, * let us sweeten the senses of our souls; * for 
there we shall see all manner of fragrant flowers, * which never wither, and are 
stained with blood. * And, praying to Christ, let us cry out: * O Master Who 
hast planted them in Thy Church like roses, * through their right acceptable 
prayers grant unto us ** the everlasting springtime of Thy kingdom, in that 
Thou lovest mankind!  
 Both now ..., in Tone IV:  
Look down, O most pure Virgin, * upon the supplications of thy servants; * 
Thou dost crush the savage assaults that beset us * and dost calm all our 
distress. * Thou art the only steadfast support that we know: * Suffer us not, 
our Lady, to be put to shame, * we who in thee have found an intercessor and 
who call upon thee. * Make speed to hearken to the entreaties of those who in 
faith cry unto thee: * Hail! O our Lady, thou art the help and the joy, ** the 
protection and salvation of our souls.  
 “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, Full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, 
** for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 Troparion of the New martyrs, in Tone III: 
The new martyrs, who with unremitting battle * have cast down the ancient 
deception, * have exalted the Faith of the Orthodox; * for, having abolished the 
worship of the iniquitous ones * and professed Christ boldly, * they now 
unceasingly * entreat Him as God supreme, ** that He grant us great mercy. 
(Once) 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone II: 
 When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.” (Twice)  
 Glory ..., Troparion of the New martyrs, in Tone III: 
The new martyrs, who with unremitting battle * have cast down the ancient 
deception, * have exalted the Faith of the Orthodox; * for, having abolished the 
worship of the iniquitous ones * and professed Christ boldly, * they now 
unceasingly * entreat Him as God supreme, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin 
Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in 
the flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in 
that He is the Lover of mankind.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. II), The Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou art highly glorified, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we sing thy praise, * 
for through the Cross of thy Son Hades hath been overthrown, * Death hath 
been slain, * and we who were dead have arisen and been granted life. * We 
have received Paradise, our ancient delight, * therefore with thanksgiving we 
glorify Christ our God ** as mighty and alone greatly merciful. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. III), The Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone II: 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou didst not prevent the grave stone from being sealed, * and having 
arisen Thou didst grant unto all * the rock of the Faith. ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee! 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of 
all Thy wonders. 
The choir of Thy Disciples rejoices in harmony with the myrrh-bearing 
women; * for with them we celebrate a common feast * to the glory and honor 
of Thy Resurrection. * Through them, O Lord who lovest mankind, ** grant 
Thy people Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou art highly blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who was 
incarnate of thee * Hades hath been taken captive, Adam recalled, the curse 
slain, and Eve set free, * death hath been put to death and we have been given 
life; * therefore with hymns we cry unto Thee: ** “Blessed art Thou O Christ 
our God who hath been thus well-pleased, glory be to Thee!” 
POLYELEOS: (Select verses): 
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy 
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Megalynarion of the New martyrs: 
Megalynarion: We magnify thee, * O all ye new martyrs of the Church of 
the East, * and we honour thy holy memory; ** for ye entreat Christ our 
God on our behalf. (Once) 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself 
raising up Adam, ** and freeing all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus the 
radiant angel within the tomb * addressed the myrrh-bearing women; * behold 
the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior is risen from the tomb. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, 
lamenting, * but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for 
lamentation is passed, weep not, ** but tell of the Resurrection to the apostles. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, 
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living 
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy 
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, Amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O 
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen 
from life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, 
God and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the little Litany, and the Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
The women coming to Thy grave after the Passion * to anoint Thy body, O 
Christ God, * saw angels in the tomb and were affrightened, * for they heard a 
message from them, ** “The Lord hath arisen, granting the world His great 
mercy.” 
Sessional Hymns of the martyrs, in Tone II:  
O most valiant martyrs, * ye new and right glorious army assembled by God 
from many places and cities, * who suffered lawfully and have been crowned by 
Christ: * Pray for us, that we who honour your holy memory with love ** may 
be delivered from every cruel circumstance.  
Ye shone forth upon the ends of the earth amid the darkness of slavery like 
the radiant sun, O sacred passion-bearers; for, illumining the faithful, ye warm 
them with divine love, and, like strong anchors, ye fix timid hearts firmly in the 
Faith amid the raging waves of life’s tempests.  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II: The choirs of the angels and multitudes of the 
Orthodox marveled at your courage, O spiritual athletes. How, suffering in your 
bodies of clay, did ye vanquish the immaterial foe? And with thanksgiving for 
you they hymn the most holy Trinity Who hath revealed martyrs in these latter 
years.  
 Both now ..., in Tone II: Thou art a microcosm of the great world of the 
Creator, O Mary, the crown of things divine which hath been foretold, the 
depiction of the primal Majesty, the ever-flowing wellspring pouring forth grace 
upon those who hymn thee with love.  
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon, in Tone II: 
I raise the eyes of my heart to Thee in heaven, O Savior. ** Save me by Thy 
radiance. 
Have mercy, O my Christ, on us who fail Thee every hour * and in many 
ways, * and grant unto us the means to return unto Thee ** in repentance 
before the end. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
 To the Holy Spirit belongeth sovereignty, * sanctification and the quickening 
of creation, * for He is God, one in essence with the Father ** and the Word. 
2nd Antiphon: 
If the Lord was not amongst us, * who could be kept safe * from the one 
who is both our foe ** and a manslayer? 
Do not hand Thy servant over to destruction, * O my Savior. * For like a 
lion they come up against me, ** they who are my foes. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
To the Holy Spirit belongeth the source of life and its honor, * for, being 
God, He preserveth all creation * by His power ** in the Father through the 
Son. 
3rd Antiphon: 
Those who trust in the Lord * are like unto the holy mountain: * they are 
utterly unshaken ** by the assaults of the enemy. 
Let not those who live for God * stretch out their hands in iniquity; * for 
with the rod of His word ** Christ forbideth such things. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit all wisdom doth flow forth, * grace unto the apostles, * 
crowns unto the martyrs, ** and unto the prophets, prophetic vision. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone II: Arouse Thyself, O Lord my God, in the 
commandment which Thou hast enjoined, * and a congregation of 
peoples shall surround Thee. 
The Verse: O Lord my God, in Thee have I put my hope. Save me from 
all them that pursue me and do Thou deliver me. 
Let every breath ..,  
The 3rd Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy 
holy Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we 
know none other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye 
faithful, * let us worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the 
Cross joy hath come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His 
Resurrection; * for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by 
death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and 
according to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life 
eternal, ** and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” The Canons: 
Canon of the Resurrection with 4 Troparia, including the Irmos; the 
canon to the Theotokos with 2 Troparia; and the Canon to the saints 
with 8 Troparia. The Resurrection Canon in Tone II: 
ODE I 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh’s 
whole army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * 
Exceedingly glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The ruler of the world, O good One, to whom we were enslaved by not 
obeying Thy commandments, hath been condemned by Thy Cross; for having 
attacked Thee as a mortal He hath fallen by the might of Thine authority, 
exposing his feebleness. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou camest into the world as the Redeemer of the race of mortals and 
prince of the life without corruption; for Thou didst tear apart death’s winding 
sheets by Thy Resurrection, which we all glorify; for gloriously hath It been 
glorified. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us.  
Theotokion: Thou hast appeared higher than all creation, visible and 
invisible, O Pure Ever-Virgin; for thou hast given birth to the Creator, since He 
was well pleased to become incarnate within thy womb; by thy boldness of 
supplication implore Him that our souls be saved. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Of old an immaterial ladder and a path in the sea wondrously made dry 
revealed thy birth-giving, O Pure One. Wherefore we all sing its praise, for 
gloriously hath It been glorified. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Power of the Most High, the supreme essence and Wisdom of God, 
became incarnate from thee, O Immaculate one, and conversed with mortals; 
for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
O threefold Unity, three-Sunned Unity: Enlighten my darkened mind and 
illumine mine impure tongue, that in writing I may worthily hymn by name Thy 
sacred new martyrs.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Forming a spiritual choir, O ye faithful, with hymns let us honour the 
glorious passion-bearers, the beacons of the Church, who illumine the hearts of 
those who with faith and love keep their memory.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Let us render timely praise to the glorious angelus, and to Athanasius of 
Attalius, the priest of the Almighty; and let us also hymn his compatriot 
Athanasius, with Anastasius the Bulgarian.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Let Athanasius, the right lauded adornment of Nicea, Acacius, the ornament 
of Athos, Alexander and Athanasius, scions of Thessalonica, Anastasius, the 
glorious boast of Nauplius, and Akhmet Kalpha be honored today.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
With the streams of your blood, O spiritual athletes, ye drowned the 
invisible enemies, by the victorious right hand of Christ Who drowned the 
ancient tyrant in the roiling waters.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
In years in which the fire of love for Christ was extinguished, ye appeared, 
O valiant passion-bearers, like the proto-martyrs Stephen and Thecla. 
Wherefore, pray ye that a new fire be instilled in hearts which have waxed cold.  
Glory ..., Illumined with the light of the three-Sunned Godhead with the 
choirs of the ancient martyrs, O new martyrs, by your intercession send down 
enlightenment upon those who hymn you.  
 Both now ..., O thou who art full of grace, first among all thou art full of all 
spiritual gifts, receiving them from the most holy Trinity and distributing them 
among the faithful; and through them the all-praised Aquilina and the all-
wondrous Argyra struggled even to the shedding of their blood.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and 
utter discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly 
keeping festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
ODE III 
Irmos: In the desert the barren Church from the nations, * flowered like a 
lily, O Lord, * at Thy coming, * by which my heart hath been 
established.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
At Thy passion creation was changed when it saw Thee, who doest all things 
by Thy divine bidding, humbled in form and derided by lawless men. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thou didst fashion me from dust by Thine own hand in accordance with 
Thine image, and when I through sin, was crushed back to the dust of death 
from whence I came Thou didst descend with me into Hades, O Christ, and 
raise me up again with Thyself. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The angelic Orders were astonished, and the hearts of mortals 
trembled at thy birth-giving, O Most pure one; wherefore in faith we honor 
thee as the Mother of God. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The One who is beyond all time, as the Creator of time, was fashioned of 
His own will as a babe from thee, O Virgin. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Let us, the faithful, hymn the womb that is wider than the heavens; for 
through it Adam, rejoicing, hath become a citizen of heaven.  
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Let Anastasius, the most honored priest, be hymned, and the steadfast 
Anthony, the boast of the Athenians. May Anastasius of Ancyra be blessed, and 
Auxentius, the scion of Vellas.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
I hymn Gabriel of Byzantium, the glorious hierarch Gabriel of Serbia, 
Gabriel the martyred monk, and George; and with them George of 
Philadelphia.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
With hymns of praise I honour George the Cypriote and another most wise 
George; and I hymn the right wondrous George who suffered lawfully in 
Magnesia.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Possessed of adoption by grace, O all-praised passion-bearers, ye rejected 
the adoption of the Moslems and spurned all their honors and pleasures, that ye 
might gain Christ alone.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
“Boast not, O tyrants, and speak not lofty things in your pride,” the new 
victors cried to the Moslems, “for the Lord God of wisdom maketh His 
adversaries weak!”  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Wondrous is the dominion of Thy might, O Christ! For, behold! this 
present, enfeebled generation, armed with Thy Cross, hath been girded about 
with Thy power, as of old, and hath vanquished the ancient foe who is mighty 
in malice.  
Glory ..., O Trinity our God, through the supplications of Thy new martyrs 
exalt the horn of Orthodox Christians, and make them steadfast, granting them 
victory over the enemy.  
 Both now ..., We glorify thee, O joyous Virgin Mother of God; and we 
hymn thee, the holy and most pure one chosen from among all generations, 
who hast been shown to be a new heaven, more exalted than the heavens, O 
most hymned one.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory. 
Kontakion of the New martyrs, in Tone I: 
Rejoice mystically, O Church of Christ, * beholding thy children, the new 
martyrs, * standing round thy table in their relics, * like newly planted olive 
shoots; * and cry aloud to the Creator of all: ** Thou art the confirmation of 
the martyrs, O Christ!  
Ikos: O brethren, we must ever and in all things be prepared for the 
inscrutable judgments of God’s providence concerning us, not least for lengthy 
captivity by the tyrants who have become the cause of many spiritual benefits 
for us, and because of whom and through whom rightly glorious, lovely and 
worthy fruit of the granary of heaven hath sprung forth for Christ: the newly 
manifest martyrs who now stand before us for glorification. For, being steadfast 
in wisdom and protected by the power of Christ, they considered all the sweet 
things of this life to be but dung, and went forth into the arena of suffering. 
Wherefore, having cast down the ungodliness of the Moslems and proclaimed 
the Christian Faith with boldness, for its sake they manfully endured 
multifarious tortures to the end and have received crowns of martyrdom, crying 
out to Him Who hath crowned them: Thou art the confirmation of martyrs, O 
Christ!  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
O warriors of Christ, your holy relics are a wondrous infirmary, an animate 
display of our Orthodox Faith, a coffer of miracles rich in myrrh, a vessel of 
heavenly fragrances surpassing the sweet scent of earthly perfumes. Entreat 
Christ God, that He grant remission of transgressions unto those who honour 
you, O new martyrs.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
Thou wast the divinely inscribed scroll of Isaiah, O Mary, the animate 
tabernacle of Moses and the strong rampart of Amos, the golden lampstand of 
Zachariah, the unquarried mountain of Daniel and the transcendent 
proclamation of the prophets. O Theotokos, ask thou forgiveness of debts for 
us who glorify thy birthgiving.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come, not an ambassador, * nor as an 
angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * therefore I cry to Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
As one condemned, O my God, Thou didst stand before the tribunal but 
did not cry out, O Master, with a pronouncement of judgment upon the 
nations. Rather Thou hast wrought salvation for the world through Thy 
passion, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord.  
The swords of the enemy failed at Thy passion; and by Thy descent into 
Hades the cities of Thine adversaries were destroyed and the arrogance of the 
tyrant was brought to naught. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: All we believers know thee to be a safe haven of salvation and 
an unshakeable rampart, O Sovereign Lady Theotokos, for by thine 
intercessions thou dost deliver our souls from all dangers. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Come and See, for the Theotokos, the divine mountain, is now made the 
dwelling-place of the Lord, and is exceedingly exalted above all the Powers of 
the heavens. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Virgin, who alone surpassing the laws of nature hath borne the Master of 
creation, and been made worthy of a divine appellation. 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Rejoicing, the hieromartyr Damascene struggled for Christ, and like a rose 
the new Demetrius, the adornment of Philadelphia, blossomed forth; and with 
them Demetrius Demos the journeyman, who suffered in Smyrna and hath 
wrought many miracles.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Damascene, Damian and the godly Dionysius have been deemed worthy of 
martyrs’ crowns, and Doukas of Lesbos hath been glorified in his endurance, 
receiving trophies of victory with the martyr Demetrius of Byzantium.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
With hymns I honour Euthymius who was raised on Athos, Zachariah, 
archpastor of Corinth, and Zosimas of Iveron, and with them I glorify the other 
Zachariah, from Arta, and Elijah Ardounes, the glorious new martyrs of Christ.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
A cedar firm and unshaken despite the winds of torture was the new 
Theodore, the adornment of Byzantium, shown to be, and with him the other 
Theodore, of Lesbos, Theophanes, the boast of monastics, and Theophilus of 
Chios.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
That ye might obtain everlasting life and the glory of the early martyrs, ye 
considered transitory life and glory to be as naught, O right victorious ones, 
and, burning with love for Christ, for His sake ye steadfastly endured all manner 
of torments.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Dragged to the slaughter, the passion-bearers cried out to the Moslems: “We 
have confessed Christ God to you and have denounced your falsehood! For 
what iniquity do ye desire to slay us? Yet shall ye behold us resplendent in the 
glory of heaven!”  
Glory ..., Full of spiritual waters, O glorious martyrs, ye have been shown to 
be rivers of living water by the hand of the life-creating Trinity, from Whom 
send ye down upon those who hymn you peace, health and salvation.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
 Both now ..., In that thou hast great and unfathomable boldness before the 
most holy Trinity which surpasseth that of all the saints, O Sovereign Lady, pray 
for us, thy servants who glorify thee with reverence, that we be delivered from 
all grievous circumstances.  
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * 
Jesus the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless 
hands he hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ Thou hast become * the Mediator between God and 
mortals, * for through Thee, O Master, * from the night of our ignorance 
we have been granted access * to Thy Father, the source of light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Like a cedar, O Christ, Thou didst crush the insolence of the nations, since 
of Thine own will Thou wast well-pleased, O Master, to be raised up in the 
flesh, on cypress, pine and cedar. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
They laid Thee, O Christ, as a lifeless corpse in the nethermost pit, but by 
Thine own stripes, O Savior, Thou hast raised with Thyself the slain who slept 
forgotten in the tombs. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Beseech Thy Son and Lord, O pure Virgin, to grant deliverance 
from hostile circumstances to prisoners, and peace to those who put their trust 
in Thee. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Ye clouds, rain down the sweetness of joy upon us here on earth, for a 
Child hath been given, who is our God before all ages, incarnate from the 
Virgin Mary. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
In the last times, the Most High hath become incarnate without seed from 
the Virgin, shining light upon my life and my flesh, vanquishing the gloominess 
of sin. 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Let every tongue glorify the martyred monk James, his deacon James, the 
initiate of the mysteries, and Ignatius, the adornments of Athos, and Jordan, the 
boast of Trebizond, who have glorified Christ in their sufferings.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Who will not perforce bless the godly John, the comely scion of Ioannina, 
and John, the glorious adornment of Sostavia, and with them the splendid John 
Koulikas?  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Let John the carpenter, the boast of Byzantium, be honoured with hymns, 
and let John the tailor, the offspring of Thasos, be lauded, and John of 
Wallachia: three martyrs who are namesakes of grace.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Like the thirsting deer of the Psalms, O new passion-bearers, ye hastened to 
the wellsprings of martyrdom, crying out to the tyrants: “Wherefore delay ye in 
torturing us? For we desire to be with Christ?”  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Like blood-thirsty wolves the tribe of Ishmael fell upon you, O all-famed 
lambs of God, and devised all manner of tortures to separate you from the love 
of Christ.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
The waves of torment which burst forth through the rage of the impious 
were unable to drown the ship of your souls, O right glorious ones, before ye 
entered the harbor of the kingdom of heaven.  
Glory ..., Let us hymn the Godhead in three Hypostases, Who hath given us 
as intercessors the holy new martyrs, who move Him to mercy for those who 
honour their memory.  
 Both now ..., Rejoice, O Ever-virgin, thou golden censer of noetic 
fragrances, wherein Christ, the heavenly Incense, hath been placed, Who 
perfumeth those who have recourse unto thee, O Theotokos.  
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the 
God of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon 
all who hymn thee. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The Just One is judged as a malefactor and nailed with the lawless ones to 
the Tree, by His own blood granting remission of sins to the guilty. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Of old, through one man, the first Adam, death entered the world; and 
through one man, the Son of God, Resurrection hath been revealed.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Without knowing a man thou didst bring forth a child, O 
Virgin, yet thou remainest ever-virgin, revealing thereby, proof of the Divinity 
of thy Son and God. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Human nature enslaved through sin found freedom through thee, O pure 
Lady; for like a lamb thy Son was sacrificed on behalf of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
We all call upon thee the true Mother of God, to deliver thy servants who 
ever provoke thy Son to anger; for thou alone hast acquired great boldness 
towards Him. 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
 John the ship-owner is truly worthy of great hymnody, as is the steadfast 
youth John, who showed himself to be another Maccabee through the grace of 
God. And with them let John, the boast of Bulgaria, be likewise hymned.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
The venerable Joasaph suffered, and with him Joseph of Syria struggled 
lawfully, as did the glorious Cosmas, the divine preacher of grace, who is 
adorned with a twofold crown.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
All praise appertaineth to the most chaste Kyranna, and to the venerable 
Cyrian who also endured torture; and hieromonk Constantius the Russian is 
worthy of laudation.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
O wondrous passion-bearers, Christ hath multiplied you in His Church like 
cedars unbroken by tortures, and by His grace He hath made your souls white 
beyond all earthly whiteness.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Like roses and lilies ye blossomed forth in the courts of the Lord, O most 
honored spiritual athletes, perfuming those who faithfully call upon you with 
the sweet fragrance of your struggles.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
In the midst of the winter of captivity ye showed yourselves to be like 
blossoms of narcissus and hyacinth, O ye who are blessed of God, and with 
your sweet fragrance ye gladden the spiritual senses of those who kiss your 
relics.  
Glory ..., Mercifully regard the entreaty of Thine unworthy servants, O 
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and of Thine omnipotent aid deprive us not who 
honour Thy new martyrs, but rescue us from sufferings and temptations.  
 Both now ..., Knowing thee to be a powerful helper, O thou who art most 
good, we offer thee supplication with all our soul: Attend and hearken unto us, 
O Sovereign Lady, and deliver thy servants from the wrath and condemnation 
of God.  
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of 
God * O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify 
God who was born of her. 
Kontakion of the Resurrection, in Tone II: 
Thou didst arise from the tomb, * O all-powerful Savior, * and seeing the 
marvel Hades was struck with fear, * the dead arose, and creation with Adam 
seeing this rejoiceth with Thee, ** therefore the world doth glorify Thee, my 
Savior. 
Ikos: O Savior, Thou art the light of those lying in darkness, and the 
resurrection and the life of all mortals. Since Thou hast raised up all mankind 
with Thyself, despoiling the might of death, and smashing the gates of Hades, 
O Word, all creation, marveling at the wonder, rejoiceth in Thy Resurrection. O 
Lover of mankind, we therefore glorify and hymn Thy condescension, and the 
world ever praiseth Thee, O my Savior. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; 
* but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore 
He is blessed and supremely exalted. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Master through Thy compassion Thou couldest not bear to see mankind 
tyrannized by death, but, becoming man, Thou hast come and saved it by Thine 
own blood; O All-powerful One, Who art the blessed and supremely glorious 
God of our Fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Christ, the gate-keepers of Hades, Beholding Thee clothed in the robe of 
vengeance, trembled; for Thou didst come, O Master, to destroy the foolish 
tyrant; O All-powerful One, Who art the blessed and supremely glorious God 
of our Fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We acknowledge thee as the Holy of Holies, O Virgin 
undefiled, Mother without bridegroom, as her who alone hath given birth to the 
immutable God; for by thy divine child-bearing thou hast become the source of 
incorruption for all the faithful. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Jacob in the night, as if in a riddle, saw God incarnate from thee; and He 
hath clearly appeared from thee unto those who sing: “O supremely divine and 
supremely glorious God of our fathers.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
He wrestleth with Jacob, foreshadowing the signs of the ineffable mingling 
that took place within thee, O pure one, through which the supremely divine 
and supremely glorious God of our fathers hath been willingly united with 
mankind. 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
With hymns and songs I praise the martyred monk Macarius, Macarius of 
Chios, and Mark of Crete, and with him Myron, the radiant star of that same 
island.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Let us send up praise to Manuel of Crete, Michael the scion of Athens, and 
the other Michael, from Granitsa, for they theologized gloriously concerning 
the Trinity.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Let Michael of Vourla and Nicetas of Nisiros be praised, and the priest 
Nicetas of the Russian monastery on Athos, and Nicodemus, venerable among 
the martyrs, who struggled in the Monastery of Meteora.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Truly the enemy, who boasted that he would overturn the earth and the sea, 
was utterly vanquished by you; for, having Christ within you, O invincible ones, 
ye trampled him beneath your feet.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
O most blessed passion-bearers, the Lord tried you like gold in the fire of 
torments, and hath received you as a rich wholeburnt offering, showing you to 
share in His own sufferings.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
To the Moslems ye preached God the Lord, for Whom ye most zealously 
accepted tortures, O spiritual athletes. Him do ye entreat, that we be freed from 
everlasting torments.  
Glory ..., Offering praise to the consubstantial Trinity, O martyrs, never 
cease to ask for us a pure heart and upright spirit, that we may chant in purity: 
O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
 Both now ..., Thou wast shown to be the daughter of God the Father, O 
Mary, the Mother of the Son, O Ever-virgin, and the Bride of the Holy Spirit, O 
most pure one, thou dwelling-place of the Trinity, the Origin of light, thou 
animate temple of the whole Godhead.  
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * 
the divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The fiery furnace in Babylon, * by divine decree divided its action, 
* burning up the Chaldeans, * while at the same time refreshing the 
faithful youths who sang: * All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
When they saw the robe of Thy flesh, O Christ, made scarlet with Thine 
own blood, the ranks of angels stood trembling with awe as they beheld Thy 
great long-suffering and cried aloud: “All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O merciful one, by Thine arising Thou hast clothed my mortality in 
immortality; therefore O Christ, Thy chosen people rejoicing sing to Thee, and 
cry: “Death is truly swallowed up by Thy victory.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Without seed didst thou conceive and ineffably bear him who 
though inseparable from the Father, dwelt in thy womb as both God and man, 
O most pure Theotokos; therefore we all acknowledge thee as the salvation of 
us all.  
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Through thee, He who is incomparable in goodness and power was seen on 
earth and lived amongst mortal mankind, to whom all we faithful sing as we cry: 
“Let all creation, to whom life hath been granted, hymn the Lord, and highly 
exalt him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Rightly proclaiming thee O pure one, we glorify thee O Theotokos, for thou 
didst bring forth incarnate, one of the Trinity, to whom together with the 
Father and the Spirit we sing: “Let all creation hymn the Lord, and highly exalt 
him throughout all ages.” 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Who will not offer praise to Nicodemus, the venerable martyr who beareth a 
staff in his hand, and to the valiant Nicholas, the offspring of Cappadocia, who 
suffered for Christ in Smyrna, and to the other Nicholas, from the village of 
Metsovon?  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Let Nicholas of Karpenesia be praised, who suffered in Byzantium, and with 
him Nicholas the scion of Byzantidas; and let Nicholas, the great boast of 
Chios, be justly crowned, for he hailed therefrom and suffered there.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 26 ---
I magnify Parthenius of Constantinople, the comely scion of Mytilene, and 
with him I honour the former apostate Paul the Russian with sacred hymns; and 
I hymn the venerable Pachomius, and the godly Panaghiotes of Caesaria.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Blessing the choir of the new passion-bearers of the Lord, O ye assembly of 
those who love the martyrs, let us cry out to them: Pray ye, that we may be 
delivered from all tribulation and condemnation, who cry: Hymn the Lord, O 
ye works, and exalt Him supremely throughout the ages!  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Following in the footsteps of the ancient martyrs, ye struggled steadfastly 
for the Faith in these present times, O right victorious ones, and move all to cry 
out to Him Who strengthened you: Hymn the Lord, O ye works, and exalt Him 
supremely throughout the ages!  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Looking down from above upon those who celebrate your memory, O 
glorious crown-bearers, mediate with the Most High Bestower of gifts, that He 
grant temporal and everlasting good things unto us who cry: Hymn the Lord, O 
ye works, and exalt Him supremely throughout the ages!  
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son, Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
When your heads were cut off, O most honoured new martyrs, ye were 
united more closely to the Head of the Church, Christ alone, the Bestower of 
life, crying out to Him, and to the Father and the Spirit: Hymn the Lord, ye 
works, and exalt Him supremely throughout the ages!  
 Both now ..., A new Adam hath been born in place of the first Adam--thy 
Son, O Virgin. And thou, O most pure Mother, standest in the place of Eve. 
Instead of Eden, of which our forefather was deprived, heaven hath been 
opened; and instead of the grief of our first mother joy was announced to thee, 
O Theotokos.  
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in 
the furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, 
* and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
And we then chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)  

--- PAGE 27 ---
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, ** the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is 
His name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation 
and generation.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered 
the proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them 
of low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the 
rich He hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His 
mercy, * as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The beginningless Son of the Father, * God and Word, * hath 
appeared unto us incarnate of a Virgin, * and hath given light to all those 
lying in darkness, * gathering the scattered; * therefore we magnify thee 
O all-hymned Theotokos.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Savior, the thrice-blessed Tree of Thine immaculate Cross was planted on 
Calvary as if in Paradise, and watered by the divine blood and water which 
flowed from Thy divine side, O Christ, it hath blossomed forth for us with life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Being crucified, O All-powerful One, Thou hast laid low the mighty, 
exalting human nature which lay below in the strongholds of Hades, and placed 
it upon Thy Father’s throne: since Thou art coming again in that nature, we 
worship and magnify Thee. 
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 
Trinitarion: With a right Orthodox belief we the faithful hymn the triune 
Unity, the consubstantial Trinity, glorifying the inseparable nature, supremely 
divine triple light, never-setting radiance and only incorruptible one, that doth 
shed forth light upon us all. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
A staff of strength hath been given to our corrupt nature: the Word of God 
in thy womb, O Pure One, and He hath raised it up after it had slid into the 
depths of Hades; therefore, O Most pure one, as the Mother of God we 
magnify thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Master receive with compassion as an ambassador on our behalf, Thy 
Mother whom Thou hast chosen, and all things will be filled with Thine own 
goodness, that we may all magnify Thee as our benefactor. 
Another to the New-martyrs: 
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
Like a star the luminous Polydorus of Cyprus shineth forth among the new 
martyrs, and the martyred monk Romanus adorneth the choir of passion-
bearers, as doth Romanus, the priest and martyr, who hath received a twofold 
crown from the Lord.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
The steadfast Sabbas Nigelis and seraphim, hierarch of Phanar, rejoice with 
the new martyrs of Christ; and with them Symeon of Trebizond and the godly 
Stamatius of Volos continually dance.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
The number of the new martyrs hath been increased by Triandaphyllus the 
seaman, Christos the gardener, who showed himself to be a right profitable 
servant of Christ, Christodoulus, the new servant of Christ and boast of 
Albania, and the virgin Zlata, the adornment of Bulgaria.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 29 ---
The incorporeal choirs of the angels rejoiced in your martyrdom for Christ, 
O right glorious passion-bearers, and the sacred ranks of the martyrs joyously 
welcomed you to the mansions of heaven.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
When the gates of heaven opened to you, the Master of all made you to 
dwell in the mansions of His Father with those who endured suffering for Him 
in the past, O ye of valorous mind; and He hath caused you to share in His 
glory. There be ye mindful of those who commemorate you.  
Refrain: Holy New martyrs, pray to God for us.  
O new council of spiritual athletes, ye heavenly chain wrought of gold and 
various in form, O sacred wreath woven of flowers, ye all-praised ones: Accept 
this supplication, and with others whose names are unknown to us ever offer 
entreaty for us to God.  
Glory ..., O our God in three Hypostases, Who hast accepted the struggles 
of Thy new martyrs and most gloriously crowned them: Through their 
intercession save Thy servants and grant that we may eternally glorify Thy 
dominion.  
 Both now ..., O Virgin, take to thy Son the sacred new martyrs, those we 
have commemorated by name and those whose names we know not, and pray 
with them, that, delivered from the fire which burneth without light, we may be 
counted worthy of the kingdom of heaven.  
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit 
leap for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor 
the holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! 
O all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-virgin. 
The small Litany: Holy is our God ..., (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion of the 3rd Resurrection Gospel:  
Let no man not believe that Christ hath arisen. For He appeared to Mary 
and afterwards was seen by those walking in the country, and He again 
appeared as they lay, to the eleven who knew the mysteries, and having sent 
them out to baptize, He was received up into heaven from whence He came 
down confirming their preaching with a multitude of signs.  
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the New martyrs: 
O Thou Who art worshipped in Trinity, accept the new martyrs whom a 
captive people bringeth to Thee as perfect offerings, as fragrant roses, as 
incense of sweet savor, as myrrh of great price; and grant us freedom and the 
forgiveness of all transgressions.  

--- PAGE 30 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Sun, having risen upon the tomb today as a Bridegroom from the bridal 
chamber, having harrowed Hades and dashed death down, by the intercession 
of her that bore Thee, Thou hast sent us light--light that has enlightened our 
hearts and our souls, light that has directed us all to walk in the paths of Thy 
commandments and the ways of peace.  
On the Aposticha, 4 Resurrection Stichera, in Tone II: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
Everything that hath breath and every creature doth glorify Thee, O Lord, * 
for through Thy Cross Thou hast destroyed death * and thus shown the 
multitude of peoples Thy Resurrection from the dead, ** as Thou alone lovest 
mankind. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Let the Jews tell how the soldiers lost the King they were guarding. * Why 
then did the stone not guard the rock of life? * Either let them give up the one 
who was buried or adore Him as risen, * exclaiming together with us: * “Glory 
to the multitude of Thy mercies: ** O Savior, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
Rejoice O ye peoples and be glad! * for an angel sat upon the grave stone * 
and hath given us good tidings saying: * “Christ is risen from the dead * and 
hath filled the universe with sweet fragrance. ** Rejoice O ye peoples and be 
glad!” 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Before Thy conception, O Lord, * an angel brought the greeting “Rejoice” 
to the one full of grace: * at Thy Resurrection an angel rolled away the stone 
from Thy glorious grave. * The one revealed the signs of joy instead of sorrow; 
* the other instead of death hath proclaimed to us the Master, and giver of life. 
* Wherefore we cry unto Thee, * “O Benefactor of all mankind, ** Lord, glory 
be to Thee!” 
4 Stichera of the New martyrs, in Tone II: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Come, all ye who love the martyrs, let us hymn the new martyrs of Christ, * 
for in these latter days they have been shown to be the glory and confirmation 
of the Orthodox Faith, * our fervent intercessors, the physicians of the infirm 
and the consolation of the sorrowful, ** and they pray that we be saved.  
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Come, ye choirs of incorporeal beings, * and celebrate with us fleshly beings 
on the honored feast of the passion-bearers; * for, likewise vested in weak 
bodies, * they struggled for Christ’s sake like incorporeal ones, * ignoring the 
cruel torments; ** and pray ye with them, that we be saved.  
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; * in His commandments 
shall he greatly delight.  
Come, ye multitudes of martyrs, greet ye one another now: * Ye ancient 
martyrs, welcome the new; * ye who bear names, welcome your namesakes; * ye 
who suffered particular torments, welcome those who have emulated you. * 
And, rejoice all together in the ineffable glory of heaven, ** praying that we be 
saved.  
Verse: Thy priests shall be clothed with righteousness, * and Thy 
righteous shall rejoice.  
O newly assembled choir of three choruses, * composed of hieromartyrs, 
martyred monastics and martyrs! * Who can praise your passion-bearing 
struggles worthily? * For, at various times and in divers places, ye all armed 
yourselves against the one impiety of Islam, * and endured multifarious tortures 
for the one true Faith. ** And now, dancing together in the heavens, pray ye 
that we be saved.  
Gospel Sticheron, Glory ..., in Tone III:  
When Mary Magdalene announced the good tidings * of the Savior’s 
Resurrection from the dead and His appearing, * the disciples, not believing, 
were reproached for their hardness of heart. * But they were sent to preach, 
armed with signs and wonders. * And Thou, O Lord, hast been lifted up to the 
Father, the Arch-Light, * while they preached the Word in all places, made 
secure by miracles. * Therefore we, enlightened by them, glorify Thy 
Resurrection from the dead, ** O Lord Who lovest mankind.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II. 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, 

--- PAGE 32 ---
Eve set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in 
praise we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-
pleased, glory be to Thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Having risen from the tomb, and having burst the bonds of Hades, * Thou 
hast destroyed the sentence of death, O Lord, * delivering all from the snares of 
the enemy. * Manifesting Thyself to Thine apostles, Thou didst send them forth 
to preach; * and through them hast granted Thy peace to the world, ** O Thou 
Who alone art greatly merciful. 
 
 

--- PAGE 33 ---
AT LITURGY  
At the Beatitudes: 6 of the Resurrection, and 4 from ODE III of the martyrs 
We bring unto Thee the prayer of the Thief, and we cry: Remember us, O 
Savior, in Thy Kingdom.  
We bring unto Thee, for the pardon of our offences, the Cross, which Thou 
didst accept for our sake, O lover of mankind. 
We worship Thy burial and Thine arising, O Master, through which Thou 
didst redeem the world from corruption, O Lover of mankind. 
By Thy death, O Lord, death hath been swallowed up, and by Thy 
Resurrection, O Savior, Thou hast saved the world. 
Those who slept in darkness, O Christ, seeing Thee the Light in the lowest 
depths of Hades, did arise. 
On rising from the grave Thou didst meet the myrrh-bearers and ordered 
them to tell Thy Disciples of Thine arising. 
Let Anastasius, the most honored priest, be hymned, and the steadfast 
Anthony, the boast of the Athenians. May Anastasius of Ancyra be blessed, and 
Auxentius, the scion of Vellas.  
I hymn Gabriel of Byzantium, the glorious hierarch Gabriel of Serbia, 
Gabriel the martyred monk, and George; and with them George of 
Philadelphia.  
Glory ..., O Trinity our God, through the supplications of Thy new martyrs 
exalt the horn of Orthodox Christians, and make them steadfast, granting them 
victory over the enemy.  
 Both now ..., We glorify thee, O joyous Virgin Mother of God; and we 
hymn thee, the holy and most pure one chosen from among all generations, 
who hast been shown to be a new heaven, more exalted than the heavens, O 
most hymned one.  
At the Entrance: 
 Resurrection Troparion, in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee. 
 

--- PAGE 34 ---
Troparion of the New martyrs, in Tone III: 
The new martyrs, who with unremitting battle * have cast down the ancient 
deception, * have exalted the Faith of the Orthodox; * for, having abolished the 
worship of the iniquitous ones * and professed Christ boldly, * they now 
unceasingly * entreat Him as God supreme, ** that He grant us great mercy.  
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone II: 
Thou didst arise from the tomb, * O all-powerful Savior, * and seeing the 
marvel Hades was struck with fear, * the dead arose, and creation with Adam 
seeing this rejoiceth with Thee, ** therefore the world doth glorify Thee, my 
Savior. 
Glory ..., Kontakion of the New martyrs, in Tone I: 
Rejoice mystically, O Church of Christ, * beholding thy children, the new 
martyrs, * standing round thy table in their relics, * like newly planted olive 
shoots; * and cry aloud to the Creator of all: ** Thou art the confirmation of 
the martyrs, O Christ!  
 Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
O Awesome intercession that cannot be put to shame, * O good one, 
disdain not our prayer; * O all-hymned Theotokos, establish the commonwealth 
of the Orthodox, * save the Orthodox Christians, and grant unto them victory 
from heaven, * for thou didst bring forth God, ** O thou only blessed one. 
The Resurrectional Prokeimenon: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone II: The Lord is my strength and my song, * and 
He is become my salvation. 
Verse: With chastisement hath The Lord chastened me; but He hath not 
given me over unto death.  
Prokeimenon for the martyrs:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: For Thy sake, O Lord, * we are slain all the 
day long.  
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: (Rom 5:1-10) 
 Brethren: being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein 
we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only so, but we 
glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; And 
patience, experience; and experience, hope: And hope maketh not ashamed; 
because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which 

--- PAGE 35 ---
is given unto us. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ 
died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet 
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. But God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved 
from wrath through him. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to 
God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by 
his life. 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: (Rom 8:28-39)  
Brethren: we know that all things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did 
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, 
that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover whom he did 
predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: 
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. What shall we then say to these 
things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own 
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give 
us all things? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God 
that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that 
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh 
intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall 
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or 
sword? As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than 
conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, 
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things 
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate 
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: The Lord hear thee in the day of affliction; the name 
of the God of Jacob defend thee. 
Verse: O Lord, save the king and hearken unto us, in what day 
whatsoever we shall call upon Thee. 
For the martyrs:  
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them; and 
He delivered them out of all their tribulations.  
 

--- PAGE 36 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST MATTHEW, (6:22-33) 
The Lord said: The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole 
body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, 
how great is that darkness! No man can serve two masters: for either he will 
hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the 
other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Take no 
thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your 
body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than 
raiment? Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor 
gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much 
better than they? Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his 
stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: And yet I say unto you, That 
even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if 
God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into 
the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take 
no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal 
shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your 
heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first 
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added 
unto you. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take 
thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST LUKE (21:12-19)  
 The Lord said unto His disciples: Before all these, they shall lay their hands 
on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into 
prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake. And it shall 
turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate 
before what ye shall answer: For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all 
your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist. And ye shall be betrayed 
both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall 
they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s 
sake. But there shall not an hair of your head perish. In your patience possess ye 
your souls. 
 

--- PAGE 37 ---
Communion Hymn: Praise ye & Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; 
praise is meet for the upright  
