--- PAGE 1 ---
 
1
BRIGHT THURSDAY EVENING 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God, always, now and ever, and unto the ages of 
ages. 
Choir: Amen. 
Clergy: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
The Priest reads the Verse, and the choir sings the Troparion after each 
Verse: 
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and let them that 
hate Him flee from before His face. 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Verse: As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish, as wax melteth before the 
fire. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: So let the sinners perish at the presence of God, and let the 
righteous be glad. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: This is the day which the Lord hath made; let us rejoice and be glad 
therein. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death. 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
 Litany of Peace: In peace let us pray ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
2
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 6 from the Oktoechos, in Tone VI: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
Victorious over Hades, O Christ, * Thou didst ascend the Cross * that Thou 
mightest raise up with Thyself * those who sat in the darkness of death; * free 
among the dead, * Thou didst pour forth life from Thine own light. ** O All-
powerful Savior, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Today Christ, having trampled on death, * hath arisen as He foretold, * 
granting joy to the world, * that we may all shout aloud the hymn and say: * O 
Source of life, O unapproachable light, * O All-powerful Savior, ** have mercy 
upon us. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Where shall we sinners escape Thee, O Lord, * who art present in all 
creation? * In heaven? Thou dwellest there. * In Hades? There Thou didst 
trample on death. * In the depths of the sea? Thy hand is also there O Master. * 
To Thee we flee and falling down before Thee we implore: ** O Lord risen from 
the dead, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
We boast in Thy Cross, O Christ, * and we hymn and glorify Thy 
Resurrection; * for Thou art our God; ** we know none other besides Thee. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Ever blessing the Lord * we hymn His Resurrection; * for having endured 
the Cross, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord, * for Thou hast destroyed the one that held the 
might of death; * Thou hast renewed us through Thy Cross, ** granting us life 
and incorruption. 
And 4 of the Theotokos, in Tone VI: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
3
Marvelous and strange things * hath the Master of heaven from the 
beginning accomplished in thee, * O all-immaculate one; * for He manifestly 
came down from on high * like a gentle rain upon thy pure womb, * showing 
thee, O Bride of God, * to be a fount gushing forth with every kind of blessing; * 
flowing forth with an abundance of healings * unto all that beseech thee for 
strengthening of soul and health of body, ** by the waters of God’s Grace. 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Repeat: Marvelous and strange things ..., 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
As is meet, I call thee the heavenly manna, * and the divine spring issuing 
forth from Paradise, * O Lady most blessed; * for the stream of grace of thy 
Spring * hath flowed forth unto the four ends of the earth, * daily covering it 
with many awesome miracles; * and all who have petitioned thee, * and partake 
of the water, * have their petitions fulfilled thereby. * Wherefore, with rejoicing, 
* all we who bear the Name of Christ * make haste with faith, ** to draw the 
sacred water of its ever flowing sweet streams. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
O Virgin thou dost ever freely gush forth streams of healings, * unto those 
who with faith flee to thy spring, * O Bride of God, * truly abundantly dost thou 
issue forth healings * unto the ailing and infirm: * Shining brightly upon the 
blind that come unto thee, and they see, * restoring a multitude of the lame, * 
and granting strength unto paralytics; * by a threefold pouring, thou didst bring 
to life one who was dead; ** and the sufferings of those with dropsy and 
respiratory maladies hast thou healed. 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Who can tell of thy might O Spring, * for thou dost pour forth an abundance 
of supra-natural healings * from thine inexhaustible source of miracles? * O how 
great are the mighty wonders which thou dost pour forth upon all! * Thou hast 
not only driven away the grievous illnesses of those * who draw nigh to thee with 
love, * but thou dost also cleanse and wash away the passions of the soul, * O 
all-undefiled one, ** O thou who dost also bestow upon all thy great mercy. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
4
Both now ..., Theotokion Dogmatic, in Tone VI: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn 
thy most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth 
timelessly from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure 
one; * By nature He is God, by nature for our sakes, He hath become a man * 
not divided into two Hypostases, * but known in two natures without 
commingling. * Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our 
souls find mercy!  
After the Entrance, and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: I will love Thee O Lord my strength; * 
the Lord is my foundation, and my refuge, and my deliverer. 
Verse: My God is my helper, and I will hope in Him, my defender, and 
the horn of my salvation. 
Verse: With praise shall I call upon the name of the Lord, and from mine 
enemies shall I be saved. 
Verse: He heard my voice out of His holy temple, and my cry before Him 
shall enter into His ears. 
Litany: Let us all say with our whole soul ..., 
Choir, in Tone VIII: Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this evening without sin. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is 
Thy name unto the ages. Amen. 
Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped in Thee. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me Thy statutes. Blessed art Thou, O Master, 
give me understanding of Thy statutes. Blessed art Thou, O Holy One, enlighten 
me by Thy statutes. 
O Lord, Thy mercy endureth forever; disdain not the work of Thy hands. To 
Thee is due praise, to Thee is due a song, to Thee glory is due, to the Father, and 
to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
Amen. 
Litany: Let us complete our evening prayer ...,  
On the Aposticha, the Sticheron of the Resurrection, in Tone VI: 
Thy Resurrection O Christ our Savior, * The angels in the heavens hymn; * 
grant also unto us who are here on earth ** to glorify Thee with pure hearts. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
5
Of the Theotokos, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice O Life-bearing Spring ...”: 
Rejoice, O life-bearing Spring, * who art as vast as all the seas, * in the 
miracles bestowed upon the world. * O noetic Ocean, which doth supersede the 
streams of the Nile, * by the torrents of grace divine. * Thou art a second Siloam, 
pouring forth water wondrously, * as though from a barren rock, * having 
received the might of the Jordan. * Thou art manifestly become the salvific 
manna, * fulfilling the needs of those who seek thee, * O maiden - Mother of 
Christ, ** who dost ever pour forth thy great mercy upon the World. 
Verse: The Most High * hath hallowed His tabernacle. 
With wondrous hymns let us the faithful, * praise and glorify the heavenly 
cloud * which rained down from heaven, * Christ the Giver of life. * Who came 
down unto the earth without suffering corruption, * the living water from which 
springeth forth immortal life, * the Ambrosia and nectar which passeth not away 
even after being consumed, * which dispelleth thirst and refreshes our souls. * 
Streams of sanctifying wisdom, issuing forth from the nous of our being, ** 
showering abundant grace upon us all. 
Verse: The rushings of the river * make glad the city of God. 
Rejoice, O life-bearing Spring, * which ever pourest forth grace, * thou fount 
of healings, * thoroughly purging the strength of enfeebling disease. * the 
restoration of sight unto the blind, * and divine cleansing of lepers! * Thou dost 
pour forth remedies * for the infirmities of all who with faith flee to thy shrine. * 
Thou art a free hospice of healing * prepared to receive all, * O holy Mother of 
Christ the Word, ** Who poureth forth great mercy upon the world. 
 (if the Presbyter so desires, the Paschal Stichera may also be sung) 
And the Paschal Stichera, in Tone V: 
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered. 
A Pascha sacred today hath been shown unto us; * Pascha new and holy, * a 
Pascha mystical, * a Pascha all-venerable! * A Pascha that is Christ the Redeemer; 
* a Pascha immaculate, * a great Pascha; * a Pascha of the faithful; * a Pascha 
that hath opened the gates of Paradise to us; ** a Pascha that doth sanctify all the 
faithful. 
Verse: As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish. 
Come from the vision, O ye women, bearers of good tidings, * and say ye 
unto Zion: * Receive from us the good tidings * of the Resurrection of Christ; * 
adorn thyself, exult, * and rejoice, O Jerusalem, * for thou hast seen Christ the 
King, ** like a bridegroom come forth from the tomb. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
6
Verse: So let sinners perish at the presence of God, and let the righteous 
be glad. 
The myrrh-bearing women * in the deep dawn * stood before the tomb of 
the Giver of life; * they found an angel sitting upon the stone, * and he, speaking 
to them, said thus: * Why seek ye the Living among the dead? *Why mourn ye 
the Incorruptible amid corruption? ** Go, proclaim unto His disciples. 
Verse: This is the day which the Lord hath made, let us rejoice and be glad 
therein. 
Pascha the beautiful, * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha, * the Pascha all-venerable 
hath dawned upon us. * Pascha, with joy let us embrace one another. * O 
Pascha! * Ransom from sorrow, * for from the tomb today, * as from a bridal 
chamber, * hath Christ shone forth, * and hath filled the women with joy, saying: 
** Proclaim unto the apostles. 
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
O ye lovers of solemn festivals, * let us sound the trumpet in hymns; * let us 
leap for joy because of the waters, * and let us dance with rejoicing, * on account 
of the ever-flowing floods of the life-bearing Spring. * Let kings and princes 
hasten together, * and partake in abundance of the grace of the Spring; * for it 
hath saved kings, * and, by the touch of its waters, it hath raised up the 
bedridden. * O ye shepherds, and all ye people, * let us approach this rain-
bearing cloud * and draw forth the salvific water. * Ye that are infirm shall 
receive your deliverance; * ye that are in peril, your strength; * ye that be in thirst, 
your refreshment; * ye that be blind, your eyes; * ye that be deaf, your hearing; * 
ye that be afflicted, your healing; * ye that be in death, receive ye restoration of 
life. * All ye peoples, let us clap our hands, * and cry unto her who hath poured 
forth the waters of salvation * upon the faithful in every land: * O pure one, who 
pourest forth ever-living streams from thy Spring, * abandon us not, O pure 
One; ** for thou O Virgin dost ever intercede on behalf of thy servants. 
 Both now ..., in Tone V: 
It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant for the feast, * and let us 
embrace one another. * Let us say, Brethren, even to them that hate us, * let us 
forgive all things on the Resurrection, * and thus let us cry out:  
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
 
7
Priest: Wisdom! 
Choir: Father (Master), bless. 
Priest: He that is, is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Choir: Amen. Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith and Orthodox 
Christians, unto the ages of ages. 
Clergy: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death: 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life! 
THE DISMISSAL: 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who rose from the dead, trampling 
death by death and bestowing life upon those in the tombs, through the 
intercessions of His most pure Mother, and of all the saints, have mercy 
on us and save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind. 
Priest: CHRIST IS RISEN! (Thrice) 
People: TRULY HE IS RISEN! (After each) 
After which: Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by 
death, and upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
And unto us hath He granted life eternal; we worship His Resurrection on 
the third day. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 
8
BRIGHT FRIDAY MORNING 
AT MATINS  
Senior Clergyman: Glory to the holy, and consubstantial, and life-creating, 
and indivisible Trinity, always, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
Choir: Amen. 
Clergy: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
The Priest reads the Verse, and the choir sings the Troparion after each 
Verse: 
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and let them that 
hate Him flee from before His face. 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Verse: As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish, as wax melteth before the 
fire. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: So let the sinners perish at the presence of God, and let the 
righteous be glad. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: This is the day which the Lord hath made; let us rejoice and be glad 
therein. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death. 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
 Litany of Peace: In peace let us pray ..., 
ODE I 
Irmos: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O ye people; * 
Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and from earth to 
heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the song of victory. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
9
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Let us purify our senses, * and we shall behold Christ, * radiant with the 
unapproachable light of the Resurrection, * and we shall clearly hear Him say, 
Rejoice! ** as we sing the hymn of victory. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Let the heavens be glad as is meet, * and let the earth rejoice, * and let the 
whole world, both visible and invisible, * keep festival: * for Christ is risen, ** O 
gladness eternal. 
To the Theotokos:  
by Nicephorus Callistos Xanthopolous: 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou dost now gush forth grace for me, O Virgin Theotokos of the Spring, 
thereby granting me the words, by which I may praise thy Spring, from which 
issueth forth life and grace unto the faithful; for thou hast caused the Hypostatic 
Word to flow forth. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Thy temple, O honored one, hath been shown to be a supra-natural place of 
healing for all, O maiden; for clearly it hath raised up from death the faithful that 
flee thereto, causing an abundance of sweetness to flow forth unto all. 
Glory ..., Thou alone, hast truly been the cause by which grace hath 
inexhaustibly descended unto us from heaven; for thou didst cause the blind man 
to behold light in a manner past understanding, when thou didst call from on 
high unto Leo in the swampland. 
 Both now ..., Thou art the common honour of mankind O honored One, 
Rejoice O Mary, rejoice; for the Creator of all hath clearly descended upon thee 
like a drop of rain, showing thee to be an immortal Spring, O Bride of God. 
Katavasia: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O ye people; * 
Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and from earth to 
heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the song of victory. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously brought 
forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * springing 
forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
10
Now all things are filled with light; * heaven and earth, * and the nethermost 
parts of the earth; * let all creation, therefore, celebrate the arising of Christ ** 
whereby it is strengthened.  
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Yesterday I was buried with Thee, O Christ; * today I rise with Thine arising. 
* Yesterday I was crucified with Thee; * do Thou Thyself glorify me with Thee, 
O Savior, ** in Thy kingdom. 
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
I know thee to be an effulgent and holy temple of the Master of all, O 
maiden, and a Spring of incorruption from whence Christ, the Water of 
incorruption, floweth forth, and from whence we refresh ourselves. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
God hath granted grace unto thy Spring, O Lady, and by its water it 
dispelled the fearful gall-stone, granting it passage from the emperor who 
grievously suffered from it. 
Glory ..., Abundant grace doth flow forth from thee, O Virgin Theotokos, 
pouring forth in floods; through thee, the lame skip with joy, a multitude of 
lepers are cleansed, and demons are suffocated. 
 Both now ..., Unto all the faithful dost thou impart healings; to kings and 
common people, paupers and rulers, to poor and rich alike; pouring forth water 
as a source of a healing of diverse maladies. 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously brought 
forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * springing 
forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Small Litany: and Exclamation: For Thou art our God, and unto Thee do 
we send up glory: to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, 
now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst descend into the tomb, O Immortal, * Thou didst destroy the 
power of Hades. * In victory didst Thou arise, O Christ God, * proclaiming 
“Rejoice!” to the myrrh-bearing women; * granting peace to Thine apostles, ** 
and bestowing resurrection on the fallen. 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 
11
Sessional Hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Let us all who ask of grace, * with one accord praise the living and ever-
flowing divine source, * the most divine Spring, which daily poureth forth * 
healings unto all mankind, * by comparison a river’s flow is insignificant. * 
Wherefore, as is due, as we all draw nigh with love, * with faith let us now draw 
from the Spring inexhaustible strength, * truly immortal, * bedewing the hearts 
of the pious; * and with our lips let us cry aloud: ** Thou art the comforting 
solace of the flock of the faithful. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: On divine watch let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with us, * 
and show forth the light-bearing angel clearly saying: * Today salvation is 
come to the world, * for Christ is risen * as Almighty. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
As a man-child did Christ appear * when He came forth from the Virgin’s 
womb, * and as a mortal was He called the Lamb. * Without blemish also, is our 
Pascha * for He tasted no defilement; ** and as true God, perfect was He 
proclaimed. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Like unto a yearling lamb, * Christ, our blessed Crown, * of His own will was 
sacrificed for all, * a Pascha of purification; * and from the tomb the beautiful 
Sun of Righteousness ** shone forth again upon us. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
David, the ancestor of God, * danced with leaping before the symbolical Ark; 
* let us also, the holy people of God, * beholding the fulfillment of the symbols, 
* be divinely glad; ** for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Truly, more numerous than grains of sand, and drops of rain, are the 
multitude of the deeds of thy Spring, which doth unceasingly and abundantly 
pour forth upon all the earth, quickly healing all who are grievously ill. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
From thy Spring, water was poured upon the breast of the woman stricken 
with cancer, O Virgin; and straightway the fatal malady ceased at the pouring, for 
the cancer simply knew to leave. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
12
Glory ..., Incomprehensible and surpassing nature is that which hath been 
manifestly accomplished in thee, O Theotokos; for the water of thy Spring is, for 
those illnesses that are fatal, an antidote clearly unknown to nature. 
 Both now ..., The enemy doth ever slay me by the attacks of pleasures, O 
Lady Theotokos of the Spring; turn not away from me, but do thou hasten, O 
thou who art quick to help, and deliver me from his snares, that I may ever praise 
thee, O greatly praised one. 
Katavasia: On divine watch let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with us, 
* and show forth the light-bearing angel clearly saying: * Today salvation 
is come to the world, * for Christ is risen * as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, * the Sun of Righteousness, 
* Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Seeing Thy boundless compassion * they who were held in the bonds of 
hades * hastened to the light, O Christ, * with gladsome feet, ** praising the 
Pascha eternal. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Bearing lights, let us approach Christ, * Who cometh forth from the tomb 
like a bridegroom, * and with the feast-loving ranks of angels * let us celebrate ** 
the saving Pascha of God. 
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
The wondrous miracles spoken of concerning thy Spring, O Virgin maiden, 
truly astonish the minds of mortal men; for in a manner surpassing nature they 
sanctify all the faithful. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
The fleece, the manna and Siloam, the rock that poured forth Water, 
Solomon’s porch, the waters of the Jordan, and the well of the Samaritan woman 
all depicted thy grace. 
Glory ..., Drops from thy Spring, O Virgin maiden, have raised a dead man. 
Truly surpassing telling and understanding is that which hath been accomplished! 
For all things that pertain to thee surpass the telling of mankind, O all-pure one. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
13
 Both now ..., O maiden, thou hast healed my sufferings, as thou didst dry up 
the source of the woman’s issue of blood, and dispel the blistering of skin 
shriveled by fire, and cure tuberculosis, and the blockage of urine, and dysentery. 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, * the Sun of Righteousness, 
* Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Thou didst descend into the nethermost parts of the earth, * and 
didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, O Christ, * and on the 
third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the tomb. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Having kept the seals intact, O Christ, * Thou didst rise from the tomb, * O 
Thou Who didst not break the seal of the Virgin by Thy birth, * and Thou hast 
opened for us ** the doors of Paradise. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
O my Savior, the living and un-slain Sacrifice, * when, as God, Thou, of 
Thine Own will, * hadst offered up Thyself unto the Father, * Thou didst raise 
up with Thyself the whole race of Adam, ** when Thou didst rise from the 
tomb.  
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Rational speech hymneth thee as truly a Spring, O pure one; for in a manner 
surpassing reason thou hast given birth to the Depth of Wisdom, Who 
suspended the Waters in the sky, and the earth upon the waters. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Standing beneath the collapse of the stairs which threatened to crush the 
painters that were there, O all-holy Spring, thou didst hold them fast, and thou 
didst save the people when the roof collapsed during the earthquake. 
Glory ..., Wombs once bereft of fruit because of barrenness hast thou 
manifestly healed by the streams of thy Spring; for as thou didst give birth unto 
the Master of all, while yet a virgin, thou hast also granted them children. 
 Both now ..., Neither word, nor mind, nor tongue is able to rightly praise thy 
childbirth, O pure one; even the sublimity of philosophers and the beauty of the 
eloquence of rhetoricians are humbled before thee. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
 
14
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, O Christ, * and on 
the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Small Litany: and Exclamation: For Thou art the King of peace, and the 
Savior of our souls, and unto Thee do we send up glory: to the Father, 
and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of 
ages. 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
From thine unfailing fount, O thou who art full of God’s grace, * do thou 
reward me by the flow of the never-ending streams of thy grace * which 
surpasseth human telling. * And since thou didst bear the Word in a manner 
beyond human understanding, * I beseech thee to refresh me with thy divine 
grace, ** that I may cry to thee: Rejoice, O thou water of salvation. 
Ikos: O undefiled Theotokos, thou who ineffably hast given birth to the 
Word Who was begotten of the Father before the ages, do thou open my mouth, 
O modest one, that I may praise and acclaim, thee, crying such things as these 
unto thy Spring: Rejoice, Spring of unceasing joyfulness. Rejoice, Stream of 
ineffable beauty; Rejoice, Banishment of diverse impairments. Rejoice, 
Destruction of various ailments; Rejoice, Stream of clarity, curing the believing. 
Rejoice, water of jubilation, healing a multitude of the ailing; Rejoice, Lymph of 
wisdom, banishing ignorance. Rejoice, Draught for the heart, brimming with 
ambrosia in abundance. Rejoice, Bowl of manna streaming with life. Rejoice, 
Laver and Nectar, divinely-wise flowing; Rejoice, thou who hast shown us the 
passage from illness. Rejoice, thou who didst quench the fire of sickness; Rejoice, 
O thou water of salvation.  
SYNAXARION READING: 
On Friday of Renewal Week we celebrate the consecration of the temple of 
our Most Holy Lady, the Mother of God of the Life-giving Spring. Furthermore, 
we commemorate the supra-natural miracles wrought by the Mother of God 
therein.  
Verse: The Manna, Siloam, and the Porch of Solomon, are to all men 
manifestly apparent in thy Spring, O maiden. 
Verse: By the intercessions of Thy Mother, O Christ God, have mercy on 
us. Amen. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 
15
We commemorate today the manifold great miracles that surpass all nature 
that were wrought in this Church by the Mother of God. This Church was first 
built by the great emperor Leo of Thrace, also named Makelles, in the year of our 
Lord 454. It was located outside the walls of Constantinople near the Golden 
Gate, not far from the Seven Towers district. This man was good, humble and 
kindhearted even before he ascended the imperial throne. One day, as he was 
walking near the place which would later be the site of the Church, he found a 
blind man who was wandering about. Taking him by the hand, Leo comforted 
him as they went on their way. Drawing near the place where the Spring was, the 
blind man became thirsty and begged Leo to give him some water to quench his 
thirst. Leo went deeper into the woods which were full of dense trees and thick 
brush looking for water, but finding none he turned back, sorrowful. Returning, 
he heard a voice from above saying, “Leo, you do not need to tire yourself for 
there is water nearby.” He again returned and searched diligently, greatly 
exhausting himself, but still could not find any water, and again he heard the 
voice as before, saying, “Emperor Leo, enter into the deepest part of the woods 
and you will find a lake; draw some cloudy water from it with your hands and 
give it to the blind man to quench his thirst, then anoint his darkened eyes 
with the clay and you will immediately know who I am, for I have dwelt in this 
place for a long time.” Leo obeyed and did as the voice commanded him, and 
at once the blind man regained his sight. After a short time, as the Mother of 
God had foretold, Leo was enthroned as emperor. At his own expense, he then 
built the first Church near this Spring as it is seen today. Many miracles were 
worked daily in this Church. After many years, the emperor Justinian the Great 
sought and received healing in this Church from kidney stones which were 
tormenting him. Being grateful for his cure, he rebuilt the Church to the Mother 
of the Word, making it larger and more ornate. But this building was then 
destroyed by numerous earthquakes, and thus was later repaired and rebuilt by 
the emperor Basil the Macedonian and his son Leo the Wise. During their 
lifetime, this Spring worked many miracles: it healed swollen growths, 
kidney 
stones, 
tuberculosis, 
and 
many 
other 
forms 
of 
diseases: 
inflamed growths, erysipelas (characterized by high fever and watery swellings 
on and under the skin), issues of blood from the empress and other 
women, fevers lasting three and four days, suppurating abscesses (abscesses 
which discharge pus), bacterial skin infections, and barren wombs. The Grace of 
this Spring loosed the empress Zoe from her barrenness and she then gave birth 
to the emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus. This same Spring raised a dead 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
16
man from Thessaly in the following manner: he was on his way to the Spring, but 
when 
he 
realized 
that 
he 
would 
die 
before 
reaching 
it, 
he 
begged the sailors to take his body to the Church of the Spring and 
when it was time to bury him to pour over it three pails of water from this 
Spring. The sailors obeyed his request and after they had poured the water 
over him, the dead man returned to life. After many years, the Church was 
about to collapse, but the Mother of God appeared and supported it until 
all the people streamed outside to safety. Water from the Spring has cast out 
many devils from those possessed, freed many who were bound in prison, healed 
emperor Leo the Wise from stones, and cured his wife, Theophana, from acute 
fevers; it delivered his brother the Patriarch Stephen from tuberculosis, and 
restored hearing to Patriarch John of Jerusalem. It healed Tarasius, the patrician, 
of acute fevers, healed his mother, Magistrisa and his son Stilianos from kidney 
stones, and delivered a woman named Stizina from a sickness of the womb. 
Emperor Roman from Lacapa, along with his empress, was cured of locked 
bowels from drinking this water. In Chaldea, the monk Perperin and his disciple 
were healed through calling upon the Mother of God; and the monks Matthew 
and Meletius were delivered through her after they had been denounced to the 
emperor. Patricians and proconsuls and others whose names are beyond telling 
were healed. What tongue can tell of the wonders which this water has worked, 
and continues to work, to this day? They are more numerous than the drops of 
rain, than the stars and the leaves upon the trees. We have seen multitudes of 
these wonders in our own time: it has healed gangrene, poisoning by deadly 
potions, warts, erysipelas, leprosy, and fierce diseases. The water has cured those 
suffering from swellings, eye pains, tearing, and cataracts. John Varagus was 
cured of dropsy, and another Varagus was healed of a severe bacterial skin 
infection. Mark the hieromonk was cured of a swelling on one of his cheeks; an 
aristocratic woman, confined to her bed for fifteen years, was cured; Macarius 
the monk was cured of stones. It is impossible to find the words to tell of 
all the others who were healed by this water, for many were cured and 
continue to be cured in our day, for the grace of this water will never cease. The 
Church 
was 
finally 
demolished 
when 
Constantinople 
fell 
to 
the 
Moslems in 1453, and the stones from the Church were used to build the 
mosque of Sultan Bayezid. An impoverished chapel existed on the site until 
1821, the year of the Greek uprising, when even this was destroyed. God, who as 
a loving Father cares for His children, had Sultan Mahmud allow the Orthodox 
to begin rebuilding the chapel in 1833. During the construction of the chapel, 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
17
when the foundations of the earlier church were discovered, the Sultan gave his 
permission for the building of a new church on the foundation of the earlier one. 
On February 2, 1835, the new Church was consecrated and again dedicated to 
the Most Holy Theotokos by the Ecumenical Patriarch, Constantine II, twelve 
hierarchs, and a multitude of clergy and Orthodox Christians. This magnificent 
Church was again looted, desecrated, and destroyed by the Moslems in 1955. At 
present, there is a small church on the site. Today, the spring water, which is still 
a great source of miracles, is channeled into a fish-breeding tank. This holy water 
is known as “Baloukli” from the Turkish balik, which means fish.  
Through the prayers of Thy Holy Mother,  
O Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.  
Amen. 
Hymn of the Resurrection, in Tone VI: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We worship Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath 
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * 
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. (Thrice) 
Jesus having risen from the tomb, * as He foretold, * hath granted us life 
eternal, ** and great mercy. (Thrice) 
ODE VII 
Irmos: He Who delivered the children from the furnace, * became man, 
suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth clothe mortality 
with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only blessed and most 
glorious * God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
The godly-wise women with myrrh * followed after Thee in haste; * but Him 
Whom they sought with tears as dead, * they worshipped joyfully as the living 
God, * and they brought unto Thy disciples, O Christ, ** the good tidings of the 
mystical Pascha. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
18
We celebrate the death of death, * the destruction of hades, * the beginning 
of another life eternal, * and leaping for joy, * we hymn the Cause, ** the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
For truly sacred and all-festive is this saving night, * and this shining, light-
bearing day, * the harbinger of the Resurrection, * whereon the Timeless Light 
bodily ** from the tomb upon all hath shined. 
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
O Ye infirm, draw forth healing for yourselves, for the all-pure one causeth 
true sweetness to flow from her divine Spring, truly pouring forth a torrent of 
delight. Wherefore, let us all in faith draw forth from these abundant streams. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
All the faithful are astonished by thy wondrous marvels, O Lady; for thy 
water hath made the deaf and the dumb eloquent, curing them that suffer 
grievously and granting them healing. 
Glory ..., Thou dost lead out from the furnace of afflictions those who draw 
nigh unto thee, O pure one, bedewing them with water from thine awesome 
spring; for thou didst deliver a man from gout and disfigurement; and heal the 
leper, and quench malignant boils. 
 Both now ..., Ye young men and maidens, and all ye men, with heartfelt faith 
let us radiantly acclaim our Lady; for she hath healed cysts, the punctures of nails, 
foul sores, inflammations, and palsy. 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children from the furnace, * became 
man, suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth clothe 
mortality with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only blessed and 
most glorious * God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the queen 
and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein we 
bless Christ throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Come, on this auspicious day of the Resurrection, * let us partake of the fruit 
of the new vine * of divine gladness of the kingdom of Christ, * praising Him as 
God ** throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
19
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
Lift up thine eyes about thee, O Zion, * and see, for behold, there cometh 
unto thee * like God-illumined beacons, * from the west, and from the north, * 
and from the sea, and from the east, ** thy children, in thee blessing Christ 
throughout the ages. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
O Father Almighty, and Word, and Spirit, * one Nature united in three 
Hypostases, * transcendent and most divine! * Into Thee have we been baptized, 
** and Thee will we bless throughout all ages. 
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Thy Spring doth pour forth divine and honorable Water, O Virgin, and by 
the invocation of divine grace, it doth greatly staunch the effluence of those with 
dropsy. Wherefore, we honor thee, O Spring, throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Let us all gladly praise the honorable and life-streaming water; for it doth 
staunch the sources of phlegm in respiratory maladies, making an open path that 
it may freely depart. O how great are thy wonders, O pure Birthgiver of God! 
Refrain: We bless the Father, son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
What mouth can rightly praise thy wondrous birth-giving, O all-hymned one? 
And what mind can gaze upon the well-spring of thy miracles and praise them 
with words? Nature hath not the strength to stand in awe at that which is thine. 
 Both now ..., All the might of death hath been banished straightway, O 
Queen and Lady; for thou art the well-spring of Christ the immortal King, our 
Life, the Water, the Manna, throughout the ages. 
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * 
wherein we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
 
20
O how divine, how loving, * how sweet is Thy voice! * For Thou hast truly 
promised * to be with us unto the end of the age, O Christ; * having this 
foundation of hope, ** we the faithful rejoice. 
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead. 
O Christ, Thou great and most sacred Pascha! * O Wisdom, Word and power 
of God! * Grant us to partake of Thee more fully * in the unwaning day ** of 
Thy kingdom. 
Of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
The water of thy Spring doth surpass all water in essence, O pure maiden, 
clearly granting deliverance from grievous illnesses, and supernaturally pouring 
the fullness of health upon all souls. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
We all behold thy Spring as a new Siloam, a deliverer from infirmities; for 
having received noetic eyes, we can all now partake of a healthy noetic life. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Ye that seek health, hasten unto the Spring; for the grace of the Virgin 
maiden doth dwell therein. Leap for joy and be glad, O ye multitudes of the 
faithful, for in her temple, each according to his need, shall receive the 
recompense of his request. 
Glory ..., The water of thy Spring hath been exalted above the heavens, 
coursing in streams throughout the abysses of the earth; it is the nourishment of 
the soul, the nectar of the faithful, the honey from the rock, and the distribution 
of manna. 
 Both now ..., O Virgin, thou dost gladden the faithful in a manner surpassing 
nature, by pouring forth grace from thine ever-flowing Spring, and thereby 
granting us strength against our adversaries, as well as victories, health, and 
peace, and the fulfillment of our prayers. 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Small Litany: and Exclamation: For all the hosts of heaven praise Thee, 
and unto Thee do we send up glory: to the Father, and to the Son, and to 
the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
21
Exapostilarion, in Tone III:  
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on the 
third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world! (Once) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Of the Theotokos, in Tone III: 
O Sovereign Lady, * in truth thou art a never-ending source of living water, * 
for cleansing grievous ailments of both soul and body * by thy touch alone, * 
thou dost pour forth the water of salvation; ** Christ God. 
On the Praises, 8 Stichera, 4 in Tone VI: 
Choir: Let every breath praise the Lord. * Praise the Lord from the 
heavens, * praise Him in the highest. * To Thee is due praise, O God. 
Praise Him, all ye His angels; * praise Him, all ye His hosts. ** To Thee is 
due praise, O God. 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
Thy Cross, O Lord, * is the life and resurrection of Thy people, * and 
trusting in it we sing Thy praises: ** “O our risen God, have mercy upon us.” 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Thy burial, O Master, * hath opened Paradise to mankind, * and thus 
delivered from corruption we sing Thy praises: ** “ O our risen God, have 
mercy upon us.” 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
With the Father and the Spirit * let us hymn Christ risen from the dead, * and 
let us cry out to Him: ** “Thou art our life and resurrection, have mercy upon 
us.” 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
On the third day Thou didst arise from the tomb, O Christ, * as it was 
written, * raising together with Thyself our Forefather; ** wherefore the race of 
mankind both glorifies Thee and hymns Thy Resurrection. 
And 4 of the Theotokos, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
 
22
The water of the Spring * is salutary for all the ailing; * let us draw nigh, 
therefore, * with faith, * from whence let us all draw ** divine grace. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
The living well of the immortal Spring * doth bestow unfailing torrents * of 
healings * upon those * who draw nigh with faith ** and love. 
Verse: The Most High hath hallowed His tabernacle. 
The Virgin’s water doth grant * might and strength to all souls; * let us, who 
find ourselves * in the filth of the passions, * hasten unto the maiden ** and be 
washed therein. 
Verse: The rushings of the river make glad the city of God. 
The sacred urn doth now pour forth * abundant manna from the ever-
flowing Spring * for all those who ask; * let each one * draw forth ** according 
to his need. 
And the Paschal Stichera, in Tone V: 
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered. 
A Pascha sacred today hath been shown unto us; * Pascha new and holy, * a 
Pascha mystical, * a Pascha all-venerable! * A Pascha that is Christ the Redeemer; 
* a Pascha immaculate, * a great Pascha; * a Pascha of the faithful; * a Pascha 
that hath opened the gates of Paradise to us; ** a Pascha that doth sanctify all the 
faithful. 
Verse: As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish. 
Come from the vision, O ye women, bearers of good tidings, * and say ye 
unto Zion: * Receive from us the good tidings * of the Resurrection of Christ; * 
adorn thyself, exult, * and rejoice, O Jerusalem, * for thou hast seen Christ the 
King, ** like a bridegroom come forth from the tomb. 
Verse: So let sinners perish at the presence of God, and let the righteous 
be glad. 
The myrrh-bearing women * in the deep dawn * stood before the tomb of 
the Giver of life; * they found an angel sitting upon the stone, * and he, speaking 
to them, said thus: * Why seek ye the Living among the dead? *Why mourn ye 
the Incorruptible amid corruption? ** Go, proclaim unto His disciples. 
Verse: This is the day which the Lord hath made, let us rejoice and be glad 
therein. 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
 
23
Pascha the beautiful, * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha, * the Pascha all-venerable 
hath dawned upon us. * Pascha, with joy let us embrace one another. * O 
Pascha! * Ransom from sorrow, * for from the tomb today, * as from a bridal 
chamber, * hath Christ shone forth, * and hath filled the women with joy, saying: 
** Proclaim unto the apostles. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and 
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant for the feast, * and let us 
embrace one another. * Let us say, Brethren, even to them that hate us, * let us 
forgive all things on the Resurrection, ** and thus let us cry out:  
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
The usual Ektenias until: 
Priest: He that is, is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Choir: Amen. Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith and Orthodox 
Christians, unto the ages of ages. 
Clergy: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death: 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life! 
THE DISMISSAL: 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who rose from the dead, trampling 
death by death and bestowing life upon those in the tombs, through the 
intercessions of His most pure Mother, and of all the saints, have mercy 
on us and save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind. 
Priest: CHRIST IS RISEN! (Thrice) 
People: TRULY HE IS RISEN! (After each) 
After which: Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by 
death, and upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
And unto us hath He granted life eternal; we worship His Resurrection on 
the third day. 
Then the Paschal Hours are chanted in place of Compline, Nocturnes, 1st, 3rd, 
6th, and 9th hours. 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
24
AT DIVINE LITURGY ON BRIGHT FRIDAY 
AT LITURGY  
Priest: Blessed is the kingdom ..., 
Choir: Amen. 
Clergy: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
The Priest reads the verse, and the choir sings the Troparion after each Verse: 
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and let them that 
hate Him flee from before His face. 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Verse: As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish, as wax melteth before the 
fire. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: So let the sinners perish at the presence of God, and let the 
righteous be glad. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: This is the day which the Lord hath made; let us rejoice and be glad 
therein. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death. 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
 Litany of Peace: In peace let us pray ..., 
 
THE FIRST ANTIPHON 
Verse: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord all the earth; * chant ye unto His 
name, give glory in praise of Him. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: Say unto God: How awesome are Thy works! * In the multitude of 
Thy power shall Thine enemies be proved false unto Thee. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
 
25
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: Let all the earth worship Thee and chant unto Thee; * let them chant 
unto Thy name, O Most High. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
 
THE SECOND ANTIPHON 
Verse: God be gracious unto us and bless us, * and cause Thy face to shine 
upon us and have mercy on us. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst rise from the dead, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: That we may know upon the earth Thy way, * among all the nations 
Thy salvation. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst rise from the dead, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: Let all the peoples give Thee praise, O God, * let all the peoples praise 
Thee. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst rise from the dead, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Only-Begotten Son and Word of God, * Thou Who art immortal, and didst 
deign for our salvation * to become incarnate of the holy Theotokos and Ever-
virgin Mary, * without change becoming man, * and Who wast crucified, O 
Christ God, trampling down death by death: * Thou Who art one of the Holy 
Trinity, ** glorified together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, save us. 
 
THIRD ANTIPHON 
Verse: Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and let them that 
hate Him flee from before His face. 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Verse: As smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish, as wax melteth before the 
fire. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: So let the sinners perish at the presence of God, and let the 
righteous be glad, let them rejoice in the presence of God 

--- PAGE 26 ---
 
26
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
The Small Entry 
Introit: In the Churches bless ye God, the Lord from the wellsprings of 
Israel 
Then we sing the Troparion, and Kontakion of the Feast: 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! 
Tone VIII: Thou didst descend into the tomb, O Immortal, * Thou didst 
destroy the power of Hades. * In victory didst Thou arise, O Christ God, * 
proclaiming “Rejoice!” to the myrrh-bearing women; * granting peace to Thine 
apostles, ** and bestowing resurrection on the fallen. 
Kontakion of the Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., From thine unfailing fount, O thou who art full of 
God’s grace, * do thou reward me by the flow of the never-ending streams of thy 
grace * which surpasseth human telling. * And since thou didst bear the Word in 
a manner beyond human understanding, * I beseech thee to refresh me with thy 
divine grace, ** that I may cry to thee: Rejoice, O thou water of salvation. 
Then: Instead of the Trisagion: 
As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
(Thrice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia. 
 
The Prokeimenon: in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the 
earth * and their words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
The hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth magnify the Lord, 
* and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior 
 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (3:1 - 8) 
In those days, Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of 
prayer, being the ninth hour. And a certain man lame from his mother’s womb 
was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called 
Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple; Who seeing Peter 
and John about to go into the temple asked an alms. And Peter, fastening his 

--- PAGE 27 ---
 
27
eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us. And he gave heed unto them, 
expecting to receive something of them. Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I 
none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise 
up and walk. And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and 
immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength. And he leaping up stood, 
and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and 
praising God.  
EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS (2:5 - 11) 
Brethren: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being 
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made 
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was 
made in the likeness of men: And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled 
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is 
above every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; And that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and Thy truth in 
the congregation of the Saints. 
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the Saints is great and 
terrible toward all that are round about Him. 
Verse: Hearken O daughter and see, and incline thine ear; and forget not 
thine own people, and thy father’s house;  
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN. (2:12 - 22) 
At that time: Jesus went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his 
brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days. And the 
Jews’ Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. And found in the 
temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money 
sitting: And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out 
of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers’ money, 
and overthrew the tables; And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things 
hence; make not my Father’s house an house of merchandise. And his disciples 
remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up. Then 
answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing 
that thou doest these things? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this 
temple, and in three days I will raise it up. Then said the Jews, Forty and six years 

--- PAGE 28 ---
 
28
was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days? But he spake 
of the temple of his body. When therefore he was risen from the dead, his 
disciples remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the 
scripture, and the word which Jesus had said. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. (10:38 - 42; 11:27 - 28) 
At that time: Jesus entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named 
Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called Mary, which also 
sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word. But Martha was cumbered about much 
serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath 
left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me. And Jesus answered 
and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many 
things: But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which 
shall not be taken away from her. And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a 
certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is 
the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. But he said, Yea 
rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of the 
Canon of the feast, first Tone: 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Receive ye the Body of Christ, taste ye of the 
Fountain of Immortality. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
 
When the priest saith: “With the fear of God and with faith draw near,” 
instead of “Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord,” we chant: 
“Christ is risen ...,” once. And we also sing this instead of “We have seen 
the true light ...,” and instead of “Let our mouths be filled with thy praise 
...,” 
 When the priest saith: “The blessing of the Lord be upon you ...,” The 
Choir chanteth “Amen.” And then the clergy chant: “Christ is risen from 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 
29
the dead, trampling down death by death.” And the Choir chants: “And 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life.” 
 
THE DISMISSAL: 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who rose from the dead, trampling 
death by death and bestowing life upon those in the tombs, through the 
intercessions of His most pure Mother, and of all the saints, have mercy 
on us and save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind. 
Choir: Amen. 
Priest: CHRIST IS RISEN! (Thrice) 
People: TRULY HE IS RISEN! (After each) 
Choir: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and 
upon those in the tombs bestowing life! (Thrice) 
And unto us hath He granted life eternal; * we worship His Resurrection on 
the third day. 
 
 
 
 
 
