--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 6th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Having arisen from the tomb, * Thou didst come to Thy friends, while the 
doors were shut O almighty One. * And unto the disbelieving Thomas, * Thou 
didst willingly display the imprints of the nails * and the piercing in Thy holy 
side made by the spear. * Assuring and convincing him * that for the sake of 
Thy compassion ** Thou didst endure Thy saving Passion. 
Upon beholding mine extreme condescension * and my boundless 
compassion, * be not uncertain, but have thou faith, * said the Lord unto the 
Twain. * Know that I Myself am He * that endured suffering and arose from 
the sepulcher on the third day, * and despoiled the vaults of Hades, ** granting 
life unto the dead from all ages. 
Upon beholding Thee, Thomas was struck with astonishment; * and 
recognizing Thee O almighty One, he cried aloud: * “Thou art My God and my 
Lord. * I believe O Lover of mankind, * that Thou art He Who endured the 
Passion, * and Who doth heal our souls. * I worship Thy power and proclaim 
unto the world ** Thine awesome and omnipotent Resurrection. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
As the disciples were in doubt, * the Savior came on the eighth day to 
where they were gathered * and having granted them peace, He cried unto 
Thomas saying: * Come, O apostle, and feel the palms in which they fastened 
the nails. * O the good unbelief of Thomas, * which hath led the hearts of the 
faithful to knowledge! * Hence, he cried out with fear: ** O my Lord and my 
God, glory be to Thee.  
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou 
didst hearken unto me. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone I: 
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to 
him who in her midst arose from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and hath 
delivered us from our iniquities 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
A Hymn of Compunction: Since I stand condemned by mine evil thoughts 
and deeds, O Savior, * grant me the thought of returning to Thee O God, * that 
I may cry unto Thee: * Save me, O good Benefactor, ** and have mercy on me. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: Your confession before the judgment seat, O Saints, * cast 
down the power of the demons, * and freed mankind from deception. * 
Wherefore, as ye were beheaded, ye cried aloud: * May the sacrifice of our lives 
be acceptable unto Thee, O Lord, * for out of longing for Thee we have 
disdained this fleeting life, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
After Thine arising, O Lord, * Thou didst stand in the midst of Thy 
disciples when they were gathered together, * while the doors were shut, 
granting them peace. * And Thomas became convinced at beholding Thy hands 
and side, * confessing that Thou art the Lord and God, ** Who dost save them 
that hope in Thee, O Lover of mankind.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Troparion from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., Whilst the tomb was 
sealed ... 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TUESDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VII) The following Sessional Hymns 
from the Oktoechos, in Tone I: 
The women came to Thy tomb at dawn * and seeing a vision of an angel 
they trembled; * the tomb became resplendent with life; * and amazed by the 
miracle, * they returned to the disciples and proclaimed the Resurrection: * for 
Christ hath despoiled Hades, * as alone almighty and all powerful, * raising up 
those in corruption, * dispelling the fear of condemnation ** by the power of 
the Cross. 
The Hymn of Compunction, in Tone I: 
Verse: O Lord condemn me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
If the righteous barely be saved, * where shall I, the sinner, appear? * For I 
endured not the weight and burning heat of the day; * but do Thou O God 
number me together with those of the eleventh hour, ** and save me. 
The Martyricon, in Tone I: 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Since ye were all good soldiers that shared a likeminded faith, * ye feared not 
the threats of the tyrants, O ye Saints. * With longing ye drew nigh unto Christ, 
* taking up the venerable Cross. * And since ye have now completed your holy 
course, * from heaven ye have gained victory. * Glory be to Him that hath 
given you strength. * Glory be to Him that hath crowned you. * Glory be to 
Him that worketh healings for all through you. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Possessing Mary the Theotokos as an unshaken wall, * O ye faithful, * 
come, let us Worship and fall down before her; * for she hath boldness with 
Him Who was born of her, * both to intercede, ** and to save our souls from 
wrath and death. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VIII), Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
With praises let us acclaim in song, * all the apostles, and the memorial of 
the disciple of Christ. * For in a God-befitting manner he hath confirmed our 
minds, * when he touched the wounds from the nails, * seeking to have an 
assured faith, * thereby establishing true Faith throughout the world. * And he 
doth beseech the Savior, ** that He have mercy upon our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the Choir chants: “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, the Canon of Thomas Sunday, with its 
Irmos, to make eight in each Ode, and the Canon of the Menaion, to make four 
in each Ode. The Canon in Tone I: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us all sing a song of victory, O ye people, * unto Him that 
freed Israel from bitter slavery to Pharaoh * and led them dry-shod 
through the depth of the sea, * for He hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Today is the springtime of our souls; for Christ, on the third day, shone 
forth from the grave like the sun, dispelling the dark winter of our sin. Let us 
praise Him, for He hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
With splendor, the queen of seasons doth most clearly minister unto this 
light-bearing day, the queen of days, gladdening the chosen people of the 
Church, as she unceasingly praiseth the risen Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Neither the gates of death, O Christ, nor the seals of the grave, nor the bars 
of the doors could withstand Thee; but when Thou didst arise, Thou didst 
come unto Thy friends, O Master, granting them that peace that transcendeth 
every mind.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy 
commandments, * and enlighten me with the light of Thy countenance; 
* for there is none more holy than Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
By Thy Cross Thou didst render us new instead of old, and incorruptible 
instead of corruptible, O Christ; commanding us to live worthily in newness of 
life.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Though enclosed within a grave in Thy circumscribable flesh, Thou didst 
arise, O Christ, Who art uncircumscribable; and while the doors were shut, 
Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, O almighty One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Having kept intact Thy wounds, which Thou didst willingly endure for us, 
Thou didst show them unto Thy disciples, O Christ, bearing witness to Thy 
glorious Resurrection.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
The Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns/Ikos of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
As Thou camest amongst Thy disciples, O Savior, * and gavest them peace, 
** so also come amongst us and save us.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Great is the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Christ! * For when 
Habbakuk foresaw it from on high in a divine vision, * he cried unto 
Thee: Thou didst come forth for the salvation of Thy people, * O Lover 
of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Christ tasted of gall, thereby healing the tasting of the fruit of old; and now, 
together with the honeycomb, He hath granted unto our forefather to partake 
of His enlightenment and sweetness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou didst rejoice when examined O Lover of mankind: wherefore, 
encouraging Thomas to do this, Thou didst show Thy side unto the disbelieving 
one, assuring the world of Thine arising on the third day, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Drawing forth wealth from the inviolable treasury of Thy divine side which 
had been pierced by a lance, O Benefactor, the twain hath filled the world with 
wisdom and knowledge.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thine all-blessed tongue is praised, O Twain; for it was the first to 
reverently proclaim that Jesus, the Giver of life, is both God and Lord; for from 
touching Him, thou dist overflow with grace.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night we wake at dawn and praise Thee, O Christ, * 
Who art co-beginningless with the Father, * and art the Savior of our 
souls; * grant peace unto the world, O Lover of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Having come unto His sorrowful friends, the Savior dispelled all their 
sorrow by His presence; causing them to leap for joy with His Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
O how praiseworthy and truly awesome is Thomas’ undertaking! For 
daringly he touched the side that doth flash forth with the lightning of the 
divine fire.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou hast proved the disbelief of Thomas to be the begetter of belief for 
us; for by Thy wisdom, Thou dost provide all that is beneficial, O Christ, since 
Thou lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Thou didst save the prophet from the sea monster, * O Lover of 
mankind; * lead me up also out of the depth * of transgressions, I pray.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou didst not leave Thomas immersed in the depth of unbelief, O Master, 
when he stretched forth his hands to examine Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Our Savior didst say: When ye touch Me, see that I have bones and flesh; I 
am not subject to change.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thomas felt Thy side; and believing, he recognized Thee, though he was not 
present when Thou didst first come, O our Savior.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
With his searching right hand, Thomas did probe Thy life-bestowing side, O 
Christ God; * for when Thou didst enter whilst the doors were shut, ** he cried 
out unto Thee with the rest of the apostles: Thou art my Lord and my God.  
Ikos: Who preserved the disciple’s hand unconsumed when he drew nigh 
unto the fiery side of the Lord? Who gave it the daring and strength to feel the 
bone that was flaming? Surely, it was that which was touched. For if that side 
had not bestowed might unto that earthen right hand, how could it have 
touched those wounds which caused both things above and below to quake? 
This grace was given to Thomas, that he might touch and cry out to Christ: 
Thou art my Lord and my God.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: When the harmonious music summoned the people together * to 
offer adoration to the image, * the children of David, singing a hymn * 
from the odes of Sion like their fathers, * destroyed the wicked command 
of the tyrant * and transformed the flame into dew as they sang: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Since this light-bearing day is the first and sovereign of days, it is meet that 
the new and divine people should reverently rejoice therein; for, as the eighth 
day, in awesome manner it prefigureth the age which is to come. O supremely 
exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thomas the Twain, who alone was bold, and who by his unbelieving belief 
hath brought us benefactions, doth by his believing unbelief dispel gloomy 
ignorance from all the ends of the earth, clearly plaiting a crown for himself by 
saying: “Thou art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Not in vain did Thomas doubt Thine arising, nor did he keep it hidden for 
himself, but free of doubt, he hastened to show it forth unto all the nations, O 
Christ. Wherefore, we all have been taught through his unbelief to say: “Thou 
art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
With fear, Thomas placed his hand in Thy life-bearing side, O Christ, and 
trembling, he felt the twofold power of the two natures united uncommingled 
within Thee, O Savior, and with faith he cried aloud, saying: “Thou art the 
Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Praise ye the Lord Who preserved The children * in the fiery 
flame of the furnace, * descending unto them in the guise of an angel, * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Yearning for the joyous sight of Thee, Thomas disbelieved at first; but when 
he was thereof deemed worthy, he called Thee God and Lord, O Master, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Tolerating Thomas’ unbelief and having showed him His side, He was 
examined closely by the hand of the disciple, praise ye the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thine inquisitiveness hath mystically opened for us a hidden treasure, O 
Thomas; for with thy God-inspired tongue thou didst speak of things divine 
saying: Praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
We praise, we bless, we worship ...,  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Thou radiant lamp, * the Mother of God, * most wondrous 
glory, * who art more exalted than all creation, * thee do we magnify with 
hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thy radiant and most resplendent day, and abundantly radiant grace, by 
which Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, O Christ, as One comely in virtuous 
goodness, do we magnify with hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thee, Whose side was touched by a hand of clay, and yet did not consume it 
by the fire of Thine immaterial divine essence, do we magnify with hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thee, Who didst arise from the grave as God, O Christ, though we have not 
beheld Thee with our eyes, yet with our hearts have believed in Thee with love, 
do we magnify with hymns.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and do thou exult, O 
pure Theotokos, in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Exapostilarion, in Tone I: 
With thy hand thou hast searched out My wounds, * hence do not disbelieve 
in Me, * Who hath been thus wounded for thee, O Thomas, * but believe with 
the disciples, ** and preach Me, the living God, to all mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
On this day Spring is fragrant; * and the new creation danceth; * today the 
bars have been removed from the doors of disbelief, * as Thomas the friend 
crieth out: ** Thou art my Lord and God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Having endured the Cross, * and destroyed death * and risen from the dead, 
* grant peace to our lives, O Lord, ** as Thou alone art All-powerful.  
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: Having endured the Cross ..., 
Hymn of Compunction, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
O my Savior, * reject me not who am overcome by the slothfulness of sin. * 
Rouse my thoughts unto repentance, * and show me to be a worthy laborer in 
Thy vineyard; * grant me the wages of the eleventh hour ** and Thy great 
mercy. 
Martyricon, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
These soldiers of the great King * withstood the decrees of the tyrants. * 
boldly despising the torments, * they trampled down every delusion, * and 
worthily were they crowned; ** wherefore they ask of the Savior peace and 
great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
The Savior came unto the disciples while the doors were shut, * and 
granted them peace and fearlessness. * Whereupon He saith unto Thomas: * 
Why believest thou not that I have arisen from the dead? * Bring hither thy 

--- PAGE 12 ---
hand and place it in My side, and see; * because thou hast disbelieved, all have 
learned of My Passion and Resurrection, * and they shall all cry out with thee: 
** O my Lord and my God, glory be to Thee.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
With the angelic hosts, O ye faithful, * let us offer unceasing praise * to 
Christ, Who rose from the grave * on the third day ** and raised up the world 
with Himself. 
Verse: His sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and his words unto 
the ends of the world. 
 When Thomas touched Thy side, * O compassionate One, * he attained 
unto sure faith, * and we through him have also come to know Thee ** as true 
God. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the Firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
By Thine arising, * Thou hast granted peace to Thy people, * O Redeemer, 
* and Thou hast raised the world up from Hades, ** O almighty One. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Thou didst come to Thy disciples, O Christ, * while the doors were shut. * 
Then, by dispensation, Thomas was not found to be among them; * for he said: 
I will not believe unless I behold the Master, * and see the side from whence 
issued the blood, the water, and the baptism, * and observe the wound through 
which man, the great wound, was healed, * and see that He is not a spirit, but 
flesh and bones. * O Thou Who didst trample down death and didst instruct 
Thomas, ** O Lord, Glory be to Thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Troparion from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., Whilst the tomb was 
sealed ... 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 

--- PAGE 14 ---
TUESDAY OF THE SECOND WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, for the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IV of the Canon. 
Christ tasted of gall, thereby healing the tasting of the fruit of old; and now, 
together with the honeycomb, He hath granted unto our forefather to partake 
of His enlightenment and sweetness. (Twice) 
Thou didst rejoice when examined O Lover of mankind: wherefore, 
encouraging Thomas to do this, Thou didst show Thy side unto the disbelieving 
one, assuring the world of Thine arising on the third day, O Christ. (Twice) 
Drawing forth wealth from the inviolable treasury of Thy divine side which 
had been pierced by a lance, O Benefactor, the twain hath filled the world with 
wisdom and knowledge.  
Thine all-blessed tongue is praised, O Twain; for it was the first to 
reverently proclaim that Jesus, the Giver of life, is both God and Lord; for from 
touching Him, thou dist overflow with grace.  
At the Entrance The Troparion for the Feast Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
With his searching right hand, * Thomas did probe Thy life-bestowing side, 
O Christ God; * for when Thou didst enter whilst the doors were shut, * he 
cried out unto Thee * with the rest of the apostles: ** Thou art my Lord and my 
God.  
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Great is our Lord, and great is His 
strength, * and of His understanding there is no measure: 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our ears. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 4:1-10) 
In those days, as the Disciples spake unto the people, the priests, and the 
captain of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them, Being grieved that 

--- PAGE 15 ---
they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the 
dead. And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next day: for 
it was now eventide. Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; 
and the number of the men was about five thousand. And it came to pass on 
the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and scribes, And Annas the high 
priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the 
kindred of the high priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem. And when they 
had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power, or by what name, have ye 
done this? Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of 
the people, and elders of Israel, If we this day be examined of the good deed 
done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; Be it known unto 
you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him 
doth this man stand here before you whole. 
For the Reposed: 
1ST EPISTLE OF ST PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS (15:39 - 57) 
Brethren: All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of 
men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. There are 
also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, 
and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and 
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth 
from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in 
corruption; it is raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in 
glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: It is sown a natural body; it is 
raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. 
And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam 
was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but 
that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual. The first man is of 
the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, 
such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that 
are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear 
the image of the heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. 
Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be 
changed, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the 
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be 
changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 

--- PAGE 16 ---
put on immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, 
and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the 
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy 
sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength 
of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Come let us rejoice in the Lord, let us shout with jubilation unto 
God our Savior. 
Verse: For the Lord is a great God and a Great king over all the earth. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (3:16 - 21) 
The Lord said: God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For 
God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world 
through him might be saved. He that believeth on him is not condemned: but 
he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the 
name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light 
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their 
deeds were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh 
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth truth cometh 
to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. 
For the Reposed: 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (5:24 - 30) 
 The Lord said: Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, 
and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into 
condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son 
of God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so 
hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; And hath given him authority 
to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for 
the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, 
And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; 
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. I can of mine 
own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek 
not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O 
Zion. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
