--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 12th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Leaving not the Father’s bosom, * Thou didst appear on earth bearing flesh 
* in Thy compassionate loving-kindness, O Christ. * And accepting both to 
suffer and to die, * Thou didst arise on the third day. * And Thou didst enter 
while the doors were shut, * since Thou art almighty. * Whereupon, Thomas 
rejoiced upon touching Thy divine side, ** glorifying Thee as the Lord and 
Fashioner. 
Thou wast affixed upon the Cross with nails. * Thy side was pierced with a 
spear; * Thou, O Christ, didst taste of gall. * Having suffered death, Thou wast 
laid in a grave as One dead. * But as God, Thou didst utterly destroy Hades’ 
fetters, * and raised up with Thyself the dead from all ages. * Wherefore, 
without breaking the tomb’s seals, * Thou wast seen by Thy disciples, ** thus 
making sure their faith in Thine arising. 
Pascha is this present Feast; * a mystic Pascha, a sacred Pascha; * a saving 
Pascha; * a Pascha which leadeth us unto immortal life. * A Pascha which doth 
take away all sorrow. * A Pascha, which hath granted unto the disciples joyous 
grace! * Wherefore, Thomas cried aloud: * Thou art my Lord and God, ** Who 
hath taken captive Hades’ realms. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
O strange wonder, * unbelief hath given birth unto steadfast faith! * For 
Thomas said: Unless I see, I shall not believe. * And when he touched the side 
of Christ, he spake with divine authority * concerning the Incarnate One Who 
is the very Son of God, * and recognized Him as the One Who suffered in the 
flesh. * He proclaimed the Risen God, * and cried with a radiant voice: ** O my 
Lord and my God, glory be to Thee.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone I: 
By thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by 
thy Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be 
to thee. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
Of the apostles, in Tone I: 
The all-harmonious harp of the apostles, * moved by the Holy Spirit, * hath 
abolished the rites of the abominable demons. * And having proclaimed the one 
Lord, * it hath delivered the nations from the deception of idolatry, ** and hath 
taught us to worship the Trinity one in essence. 
Verse: Wondrous is God * in His Saints.  
Martyricon, in Tone I: 
O all-praised martyrs of the Lord, * the earth could not conceal you; * but 
heaven hath received you, * opening the gates of Paradise unto you. * And 
dwelling now therein, * ye joyfully partake of the Tree of Life. * Thus, we pray 
you to intercede with Christ, ** that He bestow peace and great mercy upon our 
souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
O strange wonder, * that grass should touch fire and be safe! * For Thomas 
thrust his hand into the fiery side of Jesus Christ our God, * and was not 
burned by touching. * For with fervor he changed the obstinacy of his soul into 
fervent faith, * and he cried out from the depths of his soul: * Thou art my 
Master and God, ** Who didst arise from the dead. Glory be to Thee.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Troparion from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., Whilst the tomb was 
sealed ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
THURSDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms,  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIII) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos, in Tone I: 
They nailed Thee, the Life of all, to the Cross, * and they counted Thee 
Who art immortal, as One dead. * And arising on the third day, * Thou didst 
raise up Adam from corruption. * Wherefore, the hosts of heaven cried aloud 
unto Thee, O life-giver: * Glory be to Thy divine suffering O Christ. * Glory be 
to Thy Resurrection. ** Glory be to Thy condescension, O Thou only Lover of 
mankind. 
Of the apostles, in Tone I: 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
O ye wise fishermen of the inhabited world * who have received 
compassion from God, * intercede on our behalf who cry aloud: * O Lord, save 
Thy people, and Thy City, * and through Thine apostles do Thou deliver our 
souls ** from the evils that afflict us. 
The Martyricon, in Tone I: 
Verse: Wondrous is God * in His Saints.  
With fervor, let us all turn to Christ’s martyrs for aid, * for they ever pray for 
our salvation, * let us all draw nigh unto them with faith, * for they pour forth 
the grace of healings, * and as guardians of the faith, ** they ward off the ranks 
of demons. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O Virgin maiden, * the prophets clearly proclaimed thee beforehand * as the 
Mother of God. * The divine apostles also declared thee to the world; * and we 
also believe, and acclaim thee, * and with a pious and correct understanding 
hymn thee, ** ever reverently honoring thee as the Theotokos. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIV), Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Having seen My side, be thou doubtful no longer. * Thus said the Word 
unto the disbelieving Thomas. * Touch Me with Thy hand and examine with 
thy fingers. * And having come to know the imprints of the wounds, * preach 
unto the world Mine arising, ** which dawned forth life from the tomb. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the Choir chants: “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, the Canon of Thomas Sunday, with its 
Irmos, to make eight in each Ode, and the Canon of the Menaion, to make four 
in each Ode. The Canon in Tone I: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us all sing a song of victory, O ye people, * unto Him that 
freed Israel from bitter slavery to Pharaoh * and led them dry-shod 
through the depth of the sea, * for He hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Today is the springtime of our souls; for Christ, on the third day, shone 
forth from the grave like the sun, dispelling the dark winter of our sin. Let us 
praise Him, for He hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
With splendor, the queen of seasons doth most clearly minister unto this 
light-bearing day, the queen of days, gladdening the chosen people of the 
Church, as she unceasingly praiseth the risen Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Neither the gates of death, O Christ, nor the seals of the grave, nor the bars 
of the doors could withstand Thee; but when Thou didst arise, Thou didst 
come unto Thy friends, O Master, granting them that peace that transcendeth 
every mind.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE III 
Irmos: Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy 
commandments, * and enlighten me with the light of Thy countenance; 
* for there is none more holy than Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
By Thy Cross Thou didst render us new instead of old, and incorruptible 
instead of corruptible, O Christ; commanding us to live worthily in newness of 
life.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Though enclosed within a grave in Thy circumscribable flesh, Thou didst 
arise, O Christ, Who art uncircumscribable; and while the doors were shut, 
Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, O almighty One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Having kept intact Thy wounds, which Thou didst willingly endure for us, 
Thou didst show them unto Thy disciples, O Christ, bearing witness to Thy 
glorious Resurrection.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
The Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns/Ikos of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
As Thou camest amongst Thy disciples, O Savior, * and gavest them peace, 
** so also come amongst us and save us.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Great is the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Christ! * For when 
Habbakuk foresaw it from on high in a divine vision, * he cried unto 
Thee: Thou didst come forth for the salvation of Thy people, * O Lover 
of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Christ tasted of gall, thereby healing the tasting of the fruit of old; and now, 
together with the honeycomb, He hath granted unto our forefather to partake 
of His enlightenment and sweetness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou didst rejoice when examined O Lover of mankind: wherefore, 
encouraging Thomas to do this, Thou didst show Thy side unto the disbelieving 
one, assuring the world of Thine arising on the third day, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Drawing forth wealth from the inviolable treasury of Thy divine side which 
had been pierced by a lance, O Benefactor, the twain hath filled the world with 
wisdom and knowledge.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thine all-blessed tongue is praised, O Twain; for it was the first to 
reverently proclaim that Jesus, the Giver of life, is both God and Lord; for from 
touching Him, thou dist overflow with grace.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night we wake at dawn and praise Thee, O Christ, * 
Who art co-beginningless with the Father, * and art the Savior of our 
souls; * grant peace unto the world, O Lover of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Having come unto His sorrowful friends, the Savior dispelled all their 
sorrow by His presence; causing them to leap for joy with His Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
O how praiseworthy and truly awesome is Thomas’ undertaking! For 
daringly he touched the side that doth flash forth with the lightning of the 
divine fire.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou hast proved the disbelief of Thomas to be the begetter of belief for 
us; for by Thy wisdom, Thou dost provide all that is beneficial, O Christ, since 
Thou lovest mankind.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Thou didst save the prophet from the sea monster, * O Lover of 
mankind; * lead me up also out of the depth * of transgressions, I pray.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou didst not leave Thomas immersed in the depth of unbelief, O Master, 
when he stretched forth his hands to examine Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Our Savior didst say: When ye touch Me, see that I have bones and flesh; I 
am not subject to change.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thomas felt Thy side; and believing, he recognized Thee, though he was not 
present when Thou didst first come, O our Savior.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
With his searching right hand, Thomas did probe Thy life-bestowing side, O 
Christ God; * for when Thou didst enter whilst the doors were shut, ** he cried 
out unto Thee with the rest of the apostles: Thou art my Lord and my God.  
Ikos: Who preserved the disciple’s hand unconsumed when he drew nigh 
unto the fiery side of the Lord? Who gave it the daring and strength to feel the 
bone that was flaming? Surely, it was that which was touched. For if that side 
had not bestowed might unto that earthen right hand, how could it have 
touched those wounds which caused both things above and below to quake? 
This grace was given to Thomas, that he might touch and cry out to Christ: 
Thou art my Lord and my God.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: When the harmonious music summoned the people together * to 
offer adoration to the image, * the children of David, singing a hymn * 
from the odes of Sion like their fathers, * destroyed the wicked command 
of the tyrant * and transformed the flame into dew as they sang: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Since this light-bearing day is the first and sovereign of days, it is meet that 
the new and divine people should reverently rejoice therein; for, as the eighth 
day, in awesome manner it prefigureth the age which is to come. O supremely 
exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thomas the Twain, who alone was bold, and who by his unbelieving belief 
hath brought us benefactions, doth by his believing unbelief dispel gloomy 
ignorance from all the ends of the earth, clearly plaiting a crown for himself by 
saying: “Thou art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Not in vain did Thomas doubt Thine arising, nor did he keep it hidden for 
himself, but free of doubt, he hastened to show it forth unto all the nations, O 
Christ. Wherefore, we all have been taught through his unbelief to say: “Thou 
art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
With fear, Thomas placed his hand in Thy life-bearing side, O Christ, and 
trembling, he felt the twofold power of the two natures united uncommingled 
within Thee, O Savior, and with faith he cried aloud, saying: “Thou art the 
Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Praise ye the Lord Who preserved The children * in the fiery 
flame of the furnace, * descending unto them in the guise of an angel, * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Yearning for the joyous sight of Thee, Thomas disbelieved at first; but when 
he was thereof deemed worthy, he called Thee God and Lord, O Master, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Tolerating Thomas’ unbelief and having showed him His side, He was 
examined closely by the hand of the disciple, praise ye the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thine inquisitiveness hath mystically opened for us a hidden treasure, O 
Thomas; for with thy God-inspired tongue thou didst speak of things divine 
saying: Praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
We praise, we bless, we worship ...,  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Thou radiant lamp, * the Mother of God, * most wondrous 
glory, * who art more exalted than all creation, * thee do we magnify with 
hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thy radiant and most resplendent day, and abundantly radiant grace, by 
which Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, O Christ, as One comely in virtuous 
goodness, do we magnify with hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thee, Whose side was touched by a hand of clay, and yet did not consume it 
by the fire of Thine immaterial divine essence, do we magnify with hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thee, Who didst arise from the grave as God, O Christ, though we have not 
beheld Thee with our eyes, yet with our hearts have believed in Thee with love, 
do we magnify with hymns.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and do thou exult, O 
pure Theotokos, in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion, in Tone I: 
With thy hand thou hast searched out My wounds, * hence do not disbelieve 
in Me, * Who hath been thus wounded for thee, O Thomas, * but believe with 
the disciples, ** and preach Me, the living God, to all mankind.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
On this day Spring is fragrant; * and the new creation danceth; * today the 
bars have been removed from the doors of disbelief, * as Thomas the friend 
crieth out: ** Thou art my Lord and God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
As we glorify Thy divine condescension, * we praise Thee, O Christ: * For 
Thou wast born of a Virgin, * yet Thou wast not separated from the Father; * 
as man Thou didst suffer and willingly endure the Cross; * arising from the 
grave, * as though coming forth from Thy bridal chamber, * that Thou mightest 
save the world. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: As we glorify Thy divine condescension ..., 
Of the apostles, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
Let us acclaim now with one voice the apostolic choir, * Peter and Paul and 
Andrew, Luke and Thomas with Philip, * Matthew and Bartholomew, James, 
Mark, and John, * also Simon the zealot. * Thus, as is meet, let us honor and 
praise in hymns ** the disciples’ godly company. 
Martyricon, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye martyrs, * for ye have fought the good fight. * Ye 
withstood kings and conquered tyrants; * ye feared neither Fire nor sword; * 
while your bodies were being devoured by wild beasts, * ye sent up praise unto 
Christ together with the angels * and received crowns from the heavens. * Pray 
that peace be granted to the world, ** and to our souls great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
O strange wonder! * John leaned on the bosom of the Word, and Thomas 
was deemed worthy to feel His side. * The first, in a dread manner, drew there-
from a depth of theology, even God’s condescension; * and Thomas was 
deemed worthy to teach us the mystery; * for he openly presented the proofs of 
His arising, as he cried out: ** O my Lord and my God, glory be to Thee.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Let there be banished hence * dejection born of passions, * and thoughts 
that rise like tempests. * In this wise shall the springtime of faith ** sprout up 
and blossom forth. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
Thou didst appear today * to Thy sacred apostles, * though the doors were 
shut. * Through them Thou hast renewed within us ** Thy divine Spirit. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the Firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
Our eyes now see Thee not, * but the fervent longing of our hearts’ * doth 
see Thee, O Sovereign. * Thus, in faith we confess Thee to be God ** and 
magnify Thee with hymns. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Eight days after Thine arising, O Jesus our King, * Only-begotten Word of 
the Father, * Thou didst appear unto Thy disciples while the doors were shut, * 
and didst bestow Thy peace upon them. * And to the unbelieving disciple Thou 
didst show the imprints saying: * Come, feel my hands and feet * and mine 
undefiled side. * And believing, he cried out unto Thee: ** O my Lord and my 
God, glory be to Thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Troparion from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., Whilst the tomb was 
sealed ..., 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THURSDAY OF THE SECOND WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE VII of the Canon. 
Since this light-bearing day is the first and sovereign of days, it is meet that 
the new and divine people should reverently rejoice therein; for, as the eighth 
day, in awesome manner it prefigureth the age which is to come. O supremely 
exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. (Twice) 
Thomas the Twain, who alone was bold, and who by his unbelieving belief 
hath brought us benefactions, doth by his believing unbelief dispel gloomy 
ignorance from all the ends of the earth, clearly plaiting a crown for himself by 
saying: “Thou art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou.” (Twice) 
Not in vain did Thomas doubt Thine arising, nor did he keep it hidden for 
himself, but free of doubt, he hastened to show it forth unto all the nations, O 
Christ. Wherefore, we all have been taught through his unbelief to say: “Thou 
art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
With fear, Thomas placed his hand in Thy life-bearing side, O Christ, and 
trembling, he felt the twofold power of the two natures united unmingled 
within Thee, O Savior, and with faith he cried aloud, saying: “Thou art the 
Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
At the Entrance the Troparion for the Feast in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
With his searching right hand, * Thomas did probe Thy life-bestowing side, 
O Christ God; * for when Thou didst enter whilst the doors were shut, * he 
cried out unto Thee * with the rest of the apostles: ** Thou art my Lord and my 
God.  
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Great is our Lord, and great is His 
strength, * and of His understanding there is no measure: 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our ears. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 4:23 - 31) 
In those days, the apostles being let go, they went to their own company, 
and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them. And when 
they heard that, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, 
Lord, thou art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all 
that in them is: Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why did the 
heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the earth stood 
up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his 
Christ. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, 
both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, 
were gathered together, For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel 
determined before to be done. And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: and 
grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word, By 
stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done by 
the name of thy holy child Jesus. And when they had prayed, the place was 
shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the 
Holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldness. 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Come let us rejoice in the Lord, let us shout with jubilation unto 
God our Savior. 
Verse: For the Lord is a great God and a Great king over all the earth. 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (2:1 - 11) 
The Lord said unto those of the Jews who came unto Him: Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath 
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death 
unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. 
For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in 
himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is 
the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that 
are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the 
resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: 
and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the 
Father which hath sent me. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O 
Zion. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
 
