--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 15th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Clothed in a garb of righteousness * whose whiteness transcendeth that of 
snow, * let us all exult in this Pascha, * whereon Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * hath dawned forth from among the dead, ** brightening us all 
with incorruption. 
This present day is the King and Lord; * the feast of feasts; * which in all 
truth the Lord hath made. * Wherefore, as the prophet David hymneth *, let us 
mystically rejoice O ye peoples; * For while the doors were shut, ** He granted 
peace to the disciples. 
With his probing right hand * Thomas felt the Word’s wounded hands and 
feet, * and through his unbelief confirmed the world-saving arising; * for the 
God-man arose from Hades’ dungeons, ** and thus destroyed all its strength as 
One Almighty. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Jesus came unto the disciples while the doors were shut, * and granted 
them peace and fearlessness. * Whereupon He saith unto Thomas: * Why 
believest thou not that I have arisen from the dead? * Bring hither thy hand and 
place it in My side, and see; * because thou hast disbelieved, all have learned of 
My Passion and Resurrection, * and they shall all cry out with thee: ** O my 
Lord and my God, glory be to Thee.  
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
 Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone I: 
The venerable Cross of the Savior * is an invincible wall for us; ** for 
setting our hopes thereon, we are all saved. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of 
sins; * because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world.  
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
By the intercession, O Lord, of all the Saints * and the Theotokos, * do 
Thou grant us Thy peace, * and have mercy upon us, ** since Thou alone art 
compassionate. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Thomas, touch My side with thy hand, saith Christ, * and come, feel the 
imprints of the nails. * Examine them in faith; * believe thou in Me, and be not 
unbelieving. * And when Thomas touched the Master with his finger, he cried 
out with a great voice: ** Thou art my God and Lord; O compassionately 
loving One, glory be to Thee.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Troparion from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., Whilst the tomb was 
sealed ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIX) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos; of the Cross, in Tone I: 
O Lover of mankind, * we worship the Wood of Thy Cross, * for thereto 
Thou wast affixed with nails, * Thou Who art Life of all. * Thou didst open 
Paradise to the Thief who came to Thee, * deeming him worthy of delight, * 
since, O Savior, he confessed Thee with faith and cried aloud: * Remember me, 
O Lord. * As Thou didst receive the contrite thief, * do Thou also receive us 
who cry aloud: * We have all sinned against Thy loving-kindness; ** disdain us 
not. 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God: * And worship at His footstool, for 
He is holy.  
Of the Resurrection: While watching Thy grave, the soldiers * became as 
dead men from the lightning flash of the angel * who appeared and proclaimed 
the Resurrection to the Women. * We glorify Thee, the destroyer of corruption; 
* we fall down before Thee, * who hath risen from the grave ** and who alone 
art our God. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: The glorious passion-bearers were arrayed with Thee O Lord, * 
the Boast of their contest and the Dignity of their crowns; * for by enduring 
torments they gained victory over the lawless ones, * and by divine might they 
received victory from heaven. * By their supplications, O Savior, ** free me 
from the invisible enemy and save me. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
The spotless ewe-lamb gazed upon the Lamb and Shepherd, * suspended 
upon the Cross as one dead, * and she mourned Him, lamenting maternally, * in 
her grief she said: * O my Son, how shall I endure Thy willing suffering and 
dying * and Thy condescension, which transcendeth description, ** O 
supremely good God? 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XX) Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Blessed art thou who didst touch * the august wound within the side of Him 
* Who hath accomplished the healing of the great wound of Adam; * and unto 
us who have believed in His Resurrection * through the words preached by His 
noble apostles, ** He doth grant assured blessedness. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the Choir chants: “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, the Canon of Thomas Sunday, with its 
Irmos, to make eight in each Ode, and the Canon of the Menaion, to make four 
in each Ode. The Canon in Tone I: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us all sing a song of victory, O ye people, * unto Him that 
freed Israel from bitter slavery to Pharaoh * and led them dry-shod 
through the depth of the sea, * for He hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Today is the springtime of our souls; for Christ, on the third day, shone 
forth from the grave like the sun, dispelling the dark winter of our sin. Let us 
praise Him, for He hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
With splendor, the queen of seasons doth most clearly minister unto this 
light-bearing day, the queen of days, gladdening the chosen people of the 
Church, as she unceasingly praiseth the risen Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Neither the gates of death, O Christ, nor the seals of the grave, nor the bars 
of the doors could withstand Thee; but when Thou didst arise, Thou didst 
come unto Thy friends, O Master, granting them that peace that transcendeth 
every mind.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: Establish me, O Christ, upon the immovable rock of Thy 
commandments, * and enlighten me with the light of Thy countenance; 
* for there is none more holy than Thee, * O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
By Thy Cross Thou didst render us new instead of old, and incorruptible 
instead of corruptible, O Christ; commanding us to live worthily in newness of 
life.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Though enclosed within a grave in Thy circumscribable flesh, Thou didst 
arise, O Christ, Who art uncircumscribable; and while the doors were shut, 
Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, O almighty One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Having kept intact Thy wounds, which Thou didst willingly endure for us, 
Thou didst show them unto Thy disciples, O Christ, bearing witness to Thy 
glorious Resurrection.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
The Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns/Ikos of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
As Thou camest amongst Thy disciples, O Savior, * and gavest them peace, 
** so also come amongst us and save us.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Great is the mystery of Thy dispensation, O Christ! * For when 
Habbakuk foresaw it from on high in a divine vision, * he cried unto 
Thee: Thou didst come forth for the salvation of Thy people, * O Lover 
of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Christ tasted of gall, thereby healing the tasting of the fruit of old; and now, 
together with the honeycomb, He hath granted unto our forefather to partake 
of His enlightenment and sweetness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou didst rejoice when examined O Lover of mankind: wherefore, 
encouraging Thomas to do this, Thou didst show Thy side unto the disbelieving 
one, assuring the world of Thine arising on the third day, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Drawing forth wealth from the inviolable treasury of Thy divine side which 
had been pierced by a lance, O Benefactor, the twain hath filled the world with 
wisdom and knowledge.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thine all-blessed tongue is praised, O Twain; for it was the first to 
reverently proclaim that Jesus, the Giver of life, is both God and Lord; for from 
touching Him, thou dist overflow with grace.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night we wake at dawn and praise Thee, O Christ, * 
Who art co-beginningless with the Father, * and art the Savior of our 
souls; * grant peace unto the world, O Lover of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Having come unto His sorrowful friends, the Savior dispelled all their 
sorrow by His presence; causing them to leap for joy with His Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
O how praiseworthy and truly awesome is Thomas’ undertaking! For 
daringly he touched the side that doth flash forth with the lightning of the 
divine fire.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou hast proved the disbelief of Thomas to be the begetter of belief for 
us; for by Thy wisdom, Thou dost provide all that is beneficial, O Christ, since 
Thou lovest mankind.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Thou didst save the prophet from the sea monster, * O Lover of 
mankind; * lead me up also out of the depth * of transgressions, I pray.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thou didst not leave Thomas immersed in the depth of unbelief, O Master, 
when he stretched forth his hands to examine Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Our Savior didst say: When ye touch Me, see that I have bones and flesh; I 
am not subject to change.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thomas felt Thy side; and believing, he recognized Thee, though he was not 
present when Thou didst first come, O our Savior.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
With his searching right hand, Thomas did probe Thy life-bestowing side, O 
Christ God; * for when Thou didst enter whilst the doors were shut, ** he cried 
out unto Thee with the rest of the apostles: Thou art my Lord and my God.  
Ikos: Who preserved the disciple’s hand unconsumed when he drew nigh 
unto the fiery side of the Lord? Who gave it the daring and strength to feel the 
bone that was flaming? Surely, it was that which was touched. For if that side 
had not bestowed might unto that earthen right hand, how could it have 
touched those wounds which caused both things above and below to quake? 
This grace was given to Thomas, that he might touch and cry out to Christ: 
Thou art my Lord and my God.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: When the harmonious music summoned the people together * to 
offer adoration to the image, * the children of David, singing a hymn * 
from the odes of Sion like their fathers, * destroyed the wicked command 
of the tyrant * and transformed the flame into dew as they sang: * O 
supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Since this light-bearing day is the first and sovereign of days, it is meet that 
the new and divine people should reverently rejoice therein; for, as the eighth 
day, in awesome manner it prefigureth the age which is to come. O supremely 
exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thomas the Twain, who alone was bold, and who by his unbelieving belief 
hath brought us benefactions, doth by his believing unbelief dispel gloomy 
ignorance from all the ends of the earth, clearly plaiting a crown for himself by 
saying: “Thou art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Not in vain did Thomas doubt Thine arising, nor did he keep it hidden for 
himself, but free of doubt, he hastened to show it forth unto all the nations, O 
Christ. Wherefore, we all have been taught through his unbelief to say: “Thou 
art the Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
With fear, Thomas placed his hand in Thy life-bearing side, O Christ, and 
trembling, he felt the twofold power of the two natures united uncommingled 
within Thee, O Savior, and with faith he cried aloud, saying: “Thou art the 
Lord, the supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Praise ye the Lord Who preserved The children * in the fiery 
flame of the furnace, * descending unto them in the guise of an angel, * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Yearning for the joyous sight of Thee, Thomas disbelieved at first; but when 
he was thereof deemed worthy, he called Thee God and Lord, O Master, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Tolerating Thomas’ unbelief and having showed him His side, He was 
examined closely by the hand of the disciple, praise ye the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thine inquisitiveness hath mystically opened for us a hidden treasure, O 
Thomas; for with thy God-inspired tongue thou didst speak of things divine 
saying: Praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
We praise, we bless, we worship ...,  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Thou radiant lamp, * the Mother of God, * most wondrous 
glory, * who art more exalted than all creation, * thee do we magnify with 
hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thy radiant and most resplendent day, and abundantly radiant grace, by 
which Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, O Christ, as One comely in virtuous 
goodness, do we magnify with hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thee, Whose side was touched by a hand of clay, and yet did not consume it 
by the fire of Thine immaterial divine essence, do we magnify with hymns.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee.  
Thee, Who didst arise from the grave as God, O Christ, though we have not 
beheld Thee with our eyes, yet with our hearts have believed in Thee with love, 
do we magnify with hymns.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and do thou exult, O 
pure Theotokos, in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion, in Tone I: 
With thy hand thou hast searched out My wounds, * hence do not disbelieve 
in Me, * Who hath been thus wounded for thee, O Thomas, * but believe with 
the disciples, ** and preach Me, the living God, to all mankind.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
On this day Spring is fragrant; * and the new creation danceth; * today the 
bars have been removed from the doors of disbelief, * as Thomas the friend 
crieth out: ** Thou art my Lord and God.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Through Thy Cross, O Christ, * we have become one flock of angels and 
men, * and One Church. * heaven and earth rejoice. ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: Through Thy Cross, O Christ ..., 
Of the Resurrection, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
We praise Thy saving Passion, O Christ, ** and we glorify Thy Resurrection. 
Martyricon, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Come, all ye peoples, * and with hymns and spiritual odes let us honour the 
passion-bearers of Christ, * the luminaries of the world and heralds of the Faith; 
* the ever-flowing springs * from whence gusheth forth healings for the 
faithful. * By their supplications, O Christ God, ** grant peace unto Thy world 
and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VIII: 
While the doors were shut and the disciples were assembled, * the Savior 
came where they were gathered. * And standing in their midst, He saith unto 
Thomas: * Come, feel and behold the prints of the nails. * Stretch forth thy 
hand and touch My side, * and be not unbelieving, ** but with faith proclaim 
My Resurrection from the dead.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Thou wast crucified * and didst open Paradise to the race of mankind; * and 
arising Thou didst raise the dead with Thyself, O our Life; * and by Thy mighty 
power, Thou didst utterly vanquish death. * Having united earthly things with 
things heavenly, * Thou, O Word of God, didst fill the assembly of apostles 
with great delight and rejoicing ** when Thou didst bless them with peace. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
Now corruption hath been expelled, * incorruption hath blossomed forth, * 
and the bond that held fast for many years hath been loosed. * Thus, let the 
things of the earth rejoice; * let heaven and earth be glad, * for Christ hath 
arisen, * and in this wise, death hath been despoiled. * Lo, the gladsome and 
joyous day hath shone forth, * and the Lord and Life-bestower * hath entered 
in, though the doors were shut. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the Firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
This is the day which the Lord hath made; * let us be glad and rejoice 
therein. * For, lo, the Giver of Life hath arisen; * Hades hath been despoiled. * 
And the apostolic choir upon hearing the glad tidings rejoiceth, * the 
disbelieving Thomas hath touched the Master’s side ** and by touching hath 
proclaimed Him to be dual in nature. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Thomas, touch My side with thy hand, saith Christ, * and come, feel the 
imprints of the nails. * Examine them in faith; * believe thou in Me, and be not 
unbelieving. * And when Thomas touched the Master with his finger, he cried 
out with a great voice: ** Thou art my God and Lord; O compassionately 
loving One, glory be to Thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy.  
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Troparion from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., Whilst the tomb was 
sealed ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
FRIDAY OF THE SECOND WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE VIII of the Canon. 
Yearning for the joyous sight of Thee, Thomas disbelieved at first; but when 
he was thereof deemed worthy, he called Thee God and Lord, O Master, 
Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages. (Twice) 
Tolerating Thomas’ unbelief and having showed him His side, He was 
examined closely by the hand of the disciple, praise ye the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages. (Twice) 
Thine inquisitiveness hath mystically opened for us a hidden treasure, O 
Thomas; for with thy God-inspired tongue thou didst speak of things divine 
saying: Praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. (Twice) 
At the Entrance The Troparion for the Feast Tone VII: 
Whilst the tomb was sealed, Thou, O Life, * didst shine forth from the 
grave, O Christ God; * and whilst the doors were shut, * Thou didst come unto 
Thy disciples, O Resurrection of all, * renewing through them an upright Spirit 
in us ** according to Thy great mercy. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, if there be 
any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
With his searching right hand, * Thomas did probe Thy life-bestowing side, 
O Christ God; * for when Thou didst enter whilst the doors were shut, * he 
cried out unto Thee * with the rest of the apostles: ** Thou art my Lord and my 
God.  
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Great is our Lord, and great is His 
strength, * and of His understanding there is no measure: 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our ears. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 5:1 - 11) 
In those days, a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a 
possession, And kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and 
brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles’ feet. But Peter said, Ananias, 
why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part 
of the price of the land? Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it 

--- PAGE 15 ---
was sold, was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in 
thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. And Ananias hearing 
these words fell down, and gave up the ghost: and great fear came on all them 
that heard these things. And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried 
him out, and buried him. And it was about the space of three hours after, when 
his wife, not knowing what was done, came in. And Peter answered unto her, 
Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yea, for so much. 
Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the 
Spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet of them which have buried thy husband are 
at the door, and shall carry thee out. Then fell she down straightway at his feet, 
and yielded up the ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, 
carrying her forth, buried her by her husband. And great fear came upon all the 
church, and upon as many as heard these things. 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Come let us rejoice in the Lord, let us shout with jubilation unto 
God our Savior. 
Verse: For the Lord is a great God and a Great king over all the earth. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (5:30 - 6:2) 
The Lord said unto those of the Jews who came unto Him: I can of mine 
own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek 
not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me. If I bear 
witness of myself, my witness is not true. There is another that beareth witness 
of me; and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true. Ye sent 
unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. But I receive not testimony from 
man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved. He was a burning and a 
shining light: and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light. But I have 
greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father hath given me 
to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath 
sent me. And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of 
me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. And ye 
have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not. 
Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they 
which testify of me. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. I 
receive not honour from men. But I know you, that ye have not the love of 
God in you. I am come in my Father’s name, and ye receive me not: if another 

--- PAGE 16 ---
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe, which 
receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God 
only? Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that 
accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye 
would have believed me; for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, 
how shall ye believe my words? 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O 
Zion. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
