--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 15th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”:  
When Christ had appeared, * the modest myrrh-bearers * followed in His 
steps, * ministering unto Him * with an upright mind and heart. * When He had 
reposed, ye did not abandon Him; * but rather, with tears ye came bearing 
myrrh. * Wherefore we the faithful ** celebrate your sacred memory. 
Wishing to behold the Life of all, * as He lay dead in the grave, * the godly 
women came by night. * And arriving at the tomb they heard the angel say. * As 
Christ foretold, He hath arisen, * make haste to tell His disciples; * and cast 
away the sorrow * of your much-lamenting souls; ** instead, receive ye 
inexpressible joy. 
On this day we the faithful dance for joy, * commemorating your feast, O 
myrrh-bearers, * and praising you we glorify * our supremely good Lord, * 
Beseech Him ceaselessly, O all-honored ones, * that we attain to the splendor 
of the Saints, * and that He grant to us eternal glory, * since ye have great 
boldness with Him, ** O ye blessed ones of God. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Rising up early and coming with earnestness unto Thy tomb, * the myrrh-
bearers sought for Thee so as to anoint Thine immaculate Body, O Christ. * 
And having been told by the words of the angel, * they preached to the apostles 
the tokens of joy: * That the Author of our salvation hath arisen, having 
despoiled death, ** and granting the world eternal life and great mercy.  
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
 Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, of the Crucifixion, in Tone II: 
Let Him be crucified, * cried out those who had ever enjoyed Thy favors; * 
and those slayers of the righteous * sought to receive a malefactor instead of the 
benefactor; * but Thou, O Christ, wast silent, enduring their presumptuousness, 
* wishing to suffer and to save us, ** since Thou lovest mankind. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
 Of the Resurrection: Come let us worship God the Word, * begotten of the 
Father before all ages, * incarnate of the Virgin Mary; * for having endured the 
Cross, He was handed over for burial, * as He himself had willed, * and having 
risen from the dead He hath saved me, * the whole man, ** who hath gone 
astray.  
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
The Martyricon: Having no desire for earthly pleasures, * the passion-
bearers were deemed worthy of the good things of heaven, * and became fellow 
citizens of the angels. * By their intercessions, O Lord, ** have mercy and save 
us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Joseph asked for the Body of Jesus * and laid it in his own new sepulcher; * 
for it was meet that He should come forth from the grave, * as from a bridal 
chamber. * O Thou Who hast crushed the might of death * and hast opened 
the gates of Paradise unto mankind, ** glory be to Thee.  
Then “Now lettest Thou...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparia, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
 Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
The noble Joseph ..., When Thou didst descend ..., Glory ..., from the 
Menaion, Both now ..., The angel standing ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the Great Litany:  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparia, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
 Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIX) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos, of the Crucifixion, in Tone II: 
We worship Thine immaculate icon, O good One, * asking the forgiveness 
of our sins, O Christ God; * for of Thine own Will Thou wast well-pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from slavery to the 
enemy those Whom Thou hadst fashioned. * Wherefore, with thanks we cry 
unto Thee: * Thou O Savior didst fill all things with joy, when Thou camest to 
save the world. 
Of the Resurrection, in Tone II: 
Verse: I will confess Thee with my whole heart O Lord, * and I will tell 
of all Thy wonders 
Thou didst not prevent the grave stone from being sealed, * and having 
arisen Thou didst grant unto all * the rock of the Faith. ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee! 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Martyricon, in Tone II: 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
When the martyrs of the Lord struggled in the contests, * the presumptions 
of the impious were brought to naught by means of faith; * and when in a 
blessed manner they cast down the delusions of idolatry, * they received crowns 
of victory from on high, ** and intercede on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
When Thy Mother, the Virgin, O Christ, * beheld Thee stretched out upon 
the Cross, * she wept bitterly saying: * “O my Son, what is this awesome 
mystery? * How canst Thou Who grantest eternal life unto all * willingly die a 
disgraceful death ** upon the Cross? 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XX) Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
The women brought myrrh and came unto Thy tomb O Savior, * 
whereupon seeing the angel’s bright effulgence, * Their souls were filled with 
joy, * and they preached that Thou art the God of all, * and to Thy disciples 
they cried aloud: * In truth the Life of all hath arisen from the tomb. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 
50th Psalm. 
For the Canons, the Canon of the Feast with its Irmos to make eight in each 
Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. After the third Ode, the 
Kontakion, and Sessional Hymns of the Saint. At the sixth Ode, The Kontakion 
of the feast. The Magnificat is sung. After the ninth Ode, the Exapostilarion of 
the Feast. The Canon in Tone II: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Taking up the Song of Moses, O my soul, * cry aloud: * “A helper 
and a protector hath become unto me salvation. * My God, * whom I will 
glorify.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast crucified in the flesh, O Thou Who art passionless by the 
nature of the Father; and Thou was pierced in the side, thereby causing blood 
and water to spring forth for the world. Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
I honour Thy Cross and I glorify Thy Burial, O good One, and I praise and 
worship Thine arising, and I cry out: Thou art our God and we glorify Thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though Thou didst taste of gall, O Thou Who art the sweetness of the 
Church, yet didst Thou cause incorruption to spring forth for us from Thy side. 
Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let Sion rejoice, and let heaven be glad; Christ is risen, having raised up the 
dead who chant: Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having wrapped Thy Body with fine linen, O Christ, Joseph laid Thee, our 
Salvation, in a new sepulcher; and as God, Thou didst raise up the dead. 
Anticipating the dawn, the women beheld Christ, and cried unto the divine 
disciples: Truly Christ is risen; come and praise Him together with us.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarian: O all-holy Trinity, one Godhead, beginningless Unity: Father, 
Son, and divine Spirit, save the world. Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Thou didst loose the ancient curse by thy womb, O modest 
one, by blossoming forth the Blessing for us, when thou didst give birth unto a 
Child. For He is God, though He weareth flesh.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit, * but do Thou show 
me to be fruitful * in Thy compassion O God, * Thou husbandman of all 
good things. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thy palms were nailed to the Cross, O Jesus, Thou didst bring all the 
nations together out of error and didst call them unto knowledge of Thee, O 
Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The people of the Jews cried unto Pilate: Release unto us the villainous 
thief; away with the Sinless One, away with Him, crucify Him!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 7 ---
When Thou wast crucified, O Christ, the light was darkened, the earth was 
shaken, and the many of the dead arose from the grave out of fear of Thy 
power.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
As she stood at the Cross, Thy ewe-lamb cried out with lament, O Jesus: 
Whither goest Thou, my Son? Whither dost Thou depart, O Lamb, Who art 
slain on behalf of all?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
I worship Thy Cross, I praise Thy Burial, I honour Thy Passion, and the 
nails in Thy hands, and the lance, and Thy Resurrection, O Jesus.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou art arisen, O Jesus, the enemy is despoiled, Adam is delivered together 
with Eve from the bonds of corruption by Thy Resurrection.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: I worship and praise the one Nature: the Father, the Son and 
the Upright Spirit, divided in Hypostases and united in Essence.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Blessed art thou, O pure one, who art of the root of Jesse, and 
from whom Christ, the Rod and Blossom, blossomed forth in the flesh for us.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The women brought myrrh * and came unto Thy sepulcher. * Their souls 
filled with joy * on seeing the bright angel’s light. * With great zeal and 
boldness, O Lord, they preached that Thou art the God of all, * and to Thy 
disciples they cried: ** The Life of all hath arisen from the dead.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet foreseeing Thy birth from a virgin, * prophesied 
crying aloud: * “I have heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; * For from 
the South, from the Overshadowed mountain * shalt thou come forth O 
Christ” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
By the Cross Thou didst bind the belly of Hades, and didst raise up the dead 
together with Thyself, and didst destroy the tyranny of death. Wherefore, we 
who are of Adam worship and praise Thy burial and arising, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O our Savior, Whose good pleasure it was, for the sake of Thy 
compassionate mercy to be nailed to the Cross and redeem us from the paternal 
curse, loose the bonds of my many transgressions, for Thou art able to 
accomplish whatsoever Thou dost will.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Thou Who didst nail to the Cross mine ancient curse, and didst cause 
blessing to pour forth for me from Thy side by Thy blood, O Savior, loose 
Thou the bonds of my many transgressions, for Thou art able to accomplish 
whatsoever Thou dost will.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When hades met Thee in the nethermost regions, it was embittered, O 
Savior, seeing that those whom it had the power to devour aforetime, it now 
gave up involuntarily; its depths are searched out, and it is stripped and 
despoiled of its dead.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though the stone was sealed, and the sentry was present, O ye lawless foes, 
yet the Lord arose as He foretold, loosing the bonds of my many transgressions, 
for He is able to accomplish whatsoever He doth will.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Thou Who didst arise from the sepulcher and didst despoil Hades and 
quicken the dead, and didst cause incorruption to flow forth for me by Thine 
arising, loose Thou the bonds of my many transgressions, for Thou art able to 
accomplish whatsoever Thou dost will.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Trinitarion: Who can tell of the immeasurable glory of the Godhead, 
transcendent in essence? for being the Trinity by nature, He is praised as 
beginningless and consubstantial, and is hymned as a Unity in Trinity, in simple 
hypostases.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Do thou unceasingly entreat Him Who dwelt in thy womb, O 
pure Virgin Mother, and Whom thou, the Theotokos, didst bear without 
knowing a man, that He loose the bonds of my many transgressions; for thou 
art able to help in whatsoever thou dost will.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Having dispelled the gloom of my soul, * O my Savior, do Thou 
illumine me * with the light of Thy commandments * for Thou alone art 
the King of peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou wast clothed with me, Thou didst divest me of mine ancient 
garment which, alas! the sower of sin wove for me, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Alas! my sin hath sewn fig leaves for me who by the counsel of the serpent 
have not kept Thine immaculate commandment, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though my soul was wounded by my thieving thoughts, Christ, Who came 
forth from Mary, hath healed, by pouring oil thereon.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Standing by the Cross, the most pure Theotokos called out with a maternal 
voice: Thou hast left me alone, O my Son and God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
By the weapon of Thy Cross Thou hast put down the serpent, the author of 
evil, and by Thine arising Thou hast broken the sting of death, O Jesus.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let Adam also cry out: O Death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy 
victory? Thou art destroyed by the quickening of Him that raiseth the dead.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: Thee, the God and Father, and the Son and the Spirit, do I 
worship, in three hypostases, and I believe the One to be Three, in one essence.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: We the faithful praise thee, who by a seedless conception 
didst give birth in a manner transcending nature, to Christ, the only Master, 
Who hath renewed nature.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am 
overwhelmed by the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the sea-
monster, * so also deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Hades is dead, take courage, O ye earthborn, for while Christ was hanging 
upon the Tree, He cast the sword against him, and he lieth dead; for, being 
stripped naked, he was despoiled of those he held.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Hades hath been despoiled, take courage, O ye dead; and the tombs have 
been opened: arise. Thus did Christ cry unto you from Hades, even He that 
hath come to deliver all from death and corruption.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The dead, which at one time thou didst have the power to devour, and 
which now are demanded of thee, do thou give back to Me, O Hades, crieth 
God, the Giver of life, Who hath come to deliver all from thine insatiate belly.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O ye myrrh-bearing women, why hasten ye now? Why bring ye myrrh unto 
the Living One? Christ is risen, as He foretold. Let your tears cease and be 
changed into joy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The Lord is risen and hath despoiled the enemy, and having plucked out 
them that were in fetters, He hath led forth all, as well as Adam the first-
fashioned, when He raised him up, since He is compassionate and the Lover of 
mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having wrapped Thee in linen, O Christ, the noble Joseph laid Thee in a 
tomb; and having anointed with myrrh the fallen temple of Thy Body, he rolled 
a great stone before the sepulcher.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: O ye faithful, let us praise the Trinity in Unity, glorifying the 
Father with the Son, and the Spirit Who is consubstantial with the Son, and 
Who with the Father is co-beginningless and everlasting God.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Like a vineyard didst thou conceive untilled in thy womb the 
Cluster of grapes where from, like wine, there pour forth for us torrents of 
immortality, even eternal life.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone II: 
When Thou didst cry, Rejoice, unto the myrrh-bearers, * Thou didst make 
the lamentation of Eve the first mother * to cease by Thy Resurrection, O 
Christ God. * And Thou didst bid Thine apostles to preach: ** The Savior is 
risen from the grave.  
Ikos: As the myrrh-bearers went to Thy tomb, O Savior, they were 
perplexed in mind and said to themselves: Who will roll the stone away from 
the sepulcher for us? And looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled away. 
They were awestruck by the form of the angel and his raiment. They were taken 
with trembling and thought to flee; and the youth cried unto them: Be not 
afraid; He Whom ye seek is risen; come, behold the place where the body of 
Jesus lay, and go quickly, proclaim unto the disciples: The Savior is risen from 
the grave. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Like unto the cherubim, the children rejoicing in the furnace 
sang: * “Blessed art Thou O God, * for in truth Thou hast brought this 
judgment upon us * because of our sins, * Thou art supremely praised 
and glorified throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou, as the Lover of mankind, wishing to save from error all whom Thou 
hadst fashioned, didst deign to be nailed to the Cross, that by Thy flesh Thou 
mightest renew this image demolished by the passions, O Savior; and despoiling 
Hades, Thou didst raise up the dead with Thyself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross, O compassionate One, Thou 
didst call all unto Thyself, as Thou didst promise, O good One. For in truth 
Thou wast pleased to suffer all these things because of our sins. Wherefore, 
Thou didst also open the gates of Paradise unto the thief, O Savior.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst raise up the fallen temple of Thy Body from the grave on the 
third day, as Thou didst promise, O good One, that in truth Thou mightest 
make known Thy glory which Thou dost cause to flow for us through faith; and 
thou didst take away those who were in bonds, whom Hades had held of old in 
fetters.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O mindlessness of the Jews! O frenzy of the lawless! What thing did ye see, 
that ye believed not in Christ? For did He not by a word raise up the sick? Or 
did He not Himself save the whole world? At least, let the soldiers or those that 
arose from the dead convince you.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let the guards who became as dead now say: How was He stolen, Whom he 
ungrateful ones in no wise saw? For if they saw Him not arisen, how would they 
ever have perceived how He was stolen? At least, let this stone and Christ’s 
funeral shrouds convince you.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Whom do ye guard as dead? What seals have ye placed upon the stone, O ye 
Jews, who fear the fear of theft? Behold, in truth the grave is sealed. How, 
therefore, did He arise, were Christ not God? * Let them that arose and were 
seen by many convince you.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: With the Father we glorify the Son and the Holy Spirit, crying 
with unceasing voice: O Trinity, single essence, have mercy, save us all, Thou 
Who art a Unity in three Hypostases; have compassion on us, O God, Who art 
glorified throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: O most pure One, how, except in a manner as He willed and as 
He knew, didst thou contain in thy womb a Child before Whom the hosts of 
angels tremble, since He is God? He dwelt among us, wishing to save all the 
earthborn of Adam and to loose Adam from that curse which came from the 
bitter tasting.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * unto 
Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless and 
supremely exult throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The beams of the sun withdrew themselves in fear before the sufferings of 
Christ, and the dead arose, and the mountains shook, and the earth trembled, 
and Hades was laid bare.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The thrice-blessed children who were in the furnace of old, raising up their 
hands, prefigured Thine immaculate Cross, O good One, whereby Thou didst 
cast down the might of the enemy, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O ye blind Jews, deceivers and transgressors, who disbelieved Christ’s 
arising as though it were a lie: What do ye see that is unbelievable? that Christ, 
Who raised up the dead, is risen?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Who is it that withered the fig tree? Who is it that healed the withered hand? 
Who is it that once filled the multitude in the wilderness? Is it not Christ God, 
Who raised up the dead?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Who is it that raised the four-day dead from the grave, and the son of the 
widow? Who is it that, as God, strengthened the paralytic on his bed? Is it not 
Christ God, Who raised up the dead?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The stone itself crieth, the seals call out; when ye placed them, ye appointed 
a watch to guard the tomb. Truly Christ is risen, and He liveth throughout the 
ages.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: We glorify the Son and the Holy Spirit together with the Father, 
even the Holy Trinity in one Godhead and we cry: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou 
throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Without suffering change, thou didst give birth unto One, even 
Christ God, Who is twofold of nature, Who, as the ever-living Bread, was 
fashioned without fashioning in thy womb, according to our fashion.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and 
supremely exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: In a manner surpassing nature, * the Word who timelessly shone 
forth from the Father, * hath been conceived within a womb, * according 
to the flesh, * O ye faithful with never silent hymns let us magnify Him. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the thief recognized Thee as God upon the Cross, Thou didst make 
him an heir of the noetic Paradise, as he cried out: Remember me, O Almighty 
Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast smitten for our sake, Thou wast spat upon by the lawless men, O 
Jesus, Who didst inscribe the tablets of the Law on Mount Sinai for Thy servant 
Moses.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou was pierced in Thy life-creating side, O Christ, and Thou didst cause 
Thine immaculate Blood and the precious Water to flow forth as an ever-living 
fount for the world.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast accounted among the dead, O Thou Who didst quicken the 
dead; Thou wast laid in a grave, Who didst empty the graves; Thou didst despoil 
Hades, O Thou Who didst resurrect Adam.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Glory be to Thee, O Christ Savior, Who didst cause life to flow forth, and 
the light to shine upon those in the darkness of ignorance, and Who hast 
illumined the whole world by Thine arising.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let us acclaim the wondrous Joseph, as well as Nicodemus and the faithful 
myrrh-bearers, O ye faithful, as we cry out: The Lord is truly risen. 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: Thou art beginningless, O Father; uncreated art Thou, O Son; 
of equal rank is the Spirit; the Three being One by nature and Three in 
Hypostases, even one true God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Let Jesse rejoice and let David dance, for behold, the Virgin, 
the rod planted by God, hath blossomed forth the Flower, even the everlasting 
Christ.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and do thou exult, O 
pure Theotokos, in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on 
the third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Feast.  
Hearken, ye women, and give ear unto the voice of joy, for I have trampled 
down tyrant Hades and raised the world from corruption. Hasten ye quickly and 
proclaim the gladsome tidings to My friends; for I have willed that joy shine 
forth thence upon all My creation from whence there first came sorrow. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, of the Crucifixion Tone II: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
We worship the Tree of Thy Cross, O Christ God, * which hath been 
shown forth to be the Tree of life for us who believe in Thee. * And by it he 
that ruleth the dominion of death hath been destroyed, * granting life unto us 
who had been slain by sin. * Wherefore, we cry unto Thee: ** O Benefactor of 
all, Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: We worship the Tree of Thy Cross ..., 
Of the Resurrection, in Tone II: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Everything that hath breath and every creature doth glorify Thee, O Lord, * 
for through Thy Cross Thou hast destroyed death * and thus shown the 
multitude of peoples Thy Resurrection from the dead, ** as Thou alone lovest 
mankind. 
Martyricon, in Tone II: 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Having suffered for Christ unto death, O passion-bearing martyrs, * ye have 
placed your souls in the heavens * in the hand of God, * and your relics are 
found throughout the whole world. * Priests and kings reverence them, * and all 
we the people rejoice, as we cry out as is meet: * Precious in the sight of the 
Lord ** is the death of His righteous ones. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
O myrrhbearing women, * why have ye come unto the grave? * Why seek 
ye the Living among the dead? * The Lord hath arisen, take courage, ** thus 
cried the angel.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
The women disciples of Christ * rejoiced upon hearing the words of the 
angel. * From which they came to believe in the arising of the Lord, * Who for 
our sake was counted among the dead. * For before this the myrrh-bearers 
stood before the Tomb lamenting over Christ, * and beholding the stone so 
quickly rolled away; * they were greatly perplexed ** wondering where He could 
be. 
Verse: Thou hast been gracious, O Lord, unto Thy land; Thou hast 
turned back the captivity of Jacob. 
The sacred and divine disciples of Christ * were granted unceasing and 
divine joy, * when the myrrh-bearing woman disciples of Christ * fulfilled the 
command spoken to them by the divine angel. * For they were amazed by his 
brilliant, white raiment, * and heard him speak unto them saying: * God the 
King Who hath died for us * hath utterly vanquished, through His Resurrection, 
* the dark realms of Hades. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Verse: Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have 
kissed each other. 
Having poured forth streams of ardent grief * as from a fount flowing with 
tears, * the divine women disciples of Christ * now declare glad words unto the 
eye-witnesses of grace. * Telling them of the Word’s arising, * and that joy hath 
issued forth from the tomb. * Wherefore instead of sorrow, ** they heard 
wondrous voices, bidding them all to rejoice. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
The women came with fear unto the sepulcher, * as they hastened to 
anoint Thy Body with sweet-smelling spices. * And not finding it, they were at a 
loss among themselves, * being ignorant of the Resurrection. * But an angel 
came unto them and said: ** Christ hath arisen, granting us great mercy.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparia, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
 Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
The noble Joseph ..., When Thou didst descend ..., Glory ..., from the 
Menaion, Both now ..., The angel standing ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
FRIDAY OF THE THIRD WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE VIII of the Canon. 
The beams of the sun withdrew themselves in fear before the sufferings of 
Christ, and the dead arose, and the mountains shook, and the earth trembled, 
and Hades was laid bare.  
The thrice-blessed children who were in the furnace of old, raising up their 
hands, prefigured Thine immaculate Cross, O good One, whereby Thou didst 
cast down the might of the enemy, O Christ.  
O ye blind Jews, deceivers and transgressors, who disbelieved Christ’s 
arising as though it were a lie: What do ye see that is unbelievable? that Christ, 
Who raised up the dead, is risen?  
Who is it that withered the fig tree? Who is it that healed the withered hand? 
Who is it that once filled the multitude in the wilderness? Is it not Christ God, 
Who raised up the dead?  
Trinitarion: We glorify the Son and the Holy Spirit together with the Father, 
even the Holy Trinity in one Godhead and we cry: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou 
throughout the ages.  
Theotokion: Without suffering change, thou didst give birth unto One, even 
Christ God, Who is twofold of nature, Who, as the ever-living Bread, was 
fashioned without fashioning in thy womb, according to our fashion.  
At the Entrance, the Troparia for the Feast in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Tone II: When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then 
didst Thou slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when 
Thou didst also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of 
the heavens cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
Tone II: The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing 
women, * “Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a 
stranger to corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the 
world great mercy!” 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, if there be 
any. Otherwise: 
 Both now ..., Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone II: 
When Thou didst cry, Rejoice, unto the myrrh-bearers, * Thou didst make 
the lamentation of Eve the first mother * to cease by Thy Resurrection, O 
Christ God. * And Thou didst bid Thine apostles to preach: ** The Savior is 
risen from the grave.  
The Trisagion, then: 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone II: The Lord is my strength and my song, * 
and He is become my salvation. 
Verse: With chastisement hath the Lord chastened me, but He hath not 
given me over unto death. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 8:40 - 9:19) 
In those days, Philip was found at Azotus: and passing through he preached 
in all the cities, till he came to Caesarea. And Saul, yet breathing out 
threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high 
priest, And desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he 
found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them 
bound unto Jerusalem. And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and 
suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: And he fell to the 
earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 
And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou 
persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. And he trembling and 
astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto 
him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. 
And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but 
seeing no man. And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, 
he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. 
And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink. And there 
was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him said the Lord in 
a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. And the Lord said unto 
him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the 
house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, And hath 
seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him, 
that he might receive his sight. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by 

--- PAGE 21 ---
many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: And 
here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name. 
But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to 
bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: For I 
will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name’s sake. And 
Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting his hands on him 
said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as 
thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled 
with the Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been 
scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized. And when 
he had received meat, he was strengthened.  
Alleluia, in Tone II: 
Verse: The Lord hear thee in the day of affliction; the Name of the God 
of Jacob defend thee. 
Verse: O Lord, save the king, and hearken unto us in the day when we 
call upon Thee. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (6:48 - 54) 
Jesus spake unto those of the Jews who came unto Him saying: I am that 
bread of life. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is 
the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and 
not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of 
this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which 
I will give for the life of the world. The Jews therefore strove among 
themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said 
unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and 
drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. 
 
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
