--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 18th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone II: 
In the deep of dawn, the myrrhbearing women * came unto the Lord’s 
tomb bearing sweet-smelling spices, * and finding that which they had not 
expected, * they stood reverently pondering the removal of the stone, * and said 
one to another: Where are the seals of the sepulcher? * Where are Pilate’s 
watchmen and the secure sentry? * Upon which a radiant angel, proclaimed to 
the women saying to them: * “Why do ye lament seeking Him that liveth * and 
hath given life unto the race of mortals? * Christ our God hath arisen from the 
dead, since He is Almighty, ** granting unto all incorruption, life, illumination, 
and great mercy.  
Why mingle ye tears with the myrrh-oils, O ye women disciples? * The 
stone hath been rolled away, the sepulcher hath been emptied. * Behold 
corruption hath been trodden under by Life, * the seals clearly bearing witness, 
* the guards of the disobedient ones are fast asleep. * Mortal nature hath been 
saved by the flesh of God, Hades lamenteth. * Hasten ye with joy, and say unto 
the apostles: * Christ, the Firstborn of the dead, Who caused death to die, ** 
goeth before you into Galilee.  
Rising up early and coming with earnestness unto Thy tomb, * the myrrh-
bearers sought for Thee so as to anoint Thine immaculate Body, O Christ. * 
And having been told by the words of the angel, * they preached to the apostles 
the tokens of joy: * That the Author of our salvation hath arisen, having 
despoiled death, ** and granting the world eternal life and great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
The myrrhbearing women came to Thy tomb; * and beholding the seals of 
the sepulcher * yet not finding Thine immaculate Body, * they came with haste, 
lamenting and saying: * Who hath stolen our Hope? * Who hath taken away a 
naked and anointed body, * the only comforting consolation of His Mother? * 
Alas! how hath He that hath quickened the dead been put to death? * And how 
hath He Who despoiled Hades been buried? * But do Thou after three days 
arise O Savior by Thine own authority, * as Thou didst say, ** and save our 
souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., the Dogmatic in Tone II: 
The shadow of the law hath passed now that grace hath come, * for as the 
bush wrapped in flame was not consumed, * so didst thou bear a Child O 
Virgin * and remained a virgin; * in place of a pillar of fire, the Sun of 
righteousness hath dawned, ** instead of Moses, Christ is come, the salvation 
of our souls. 
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise 
up against me redeem me. 
 Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone II: 
Come let us worship God the Word, * begotten of the Father before all 
ages, * incarnate of the Virgin Mary; * for having endured the Cross, He was 
handed over for burial, * as He himself had willed, * and having risen from the 
dead He hath saved me, * the whole man, ** who hath gone astray.  
Verse: The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty; * the Lord is 
clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Christ our Savior by nailing the record against us to the Cross * hath blotted 
it out, * and destroyed the might of death. ** We worship His arising on the 
third day. 
Verse: For He established the world * which shall not be shaken. 
With the Archangels let us hymn the Resurrection of Christ; * for He is the 
Redeemer and the Savior of our souls; * and He is coming again * with great 
glory and mighty power ** to judge the world which He hath fashioned. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days. 
Thy Resurrection, O Christ our Savior, * hath enlightened the whole 
universe; * and Thou hast called back Thine own creation. ** O all-powerful 
Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
O Thou Who hath clothed Thyself with light as with a garment, * Joseph 
with Nicodemus took Thee down from the Tree * and beholding Thee dead, 

--- PAGE 3 ---
naked, and unburied, * struck up a heartfelt dirge, * and lamenting, said: * Woe 
is me, O sweetest Jesus! * When but a short while ago the sun beheld Thee 
hanging upon the Cross, * it shrouded itself in darkness, and the earth quaked 
with fear, * and the veil of the Temple was rent in twain. * But now beholding 
Thee, * I understand that Thou didst willingly submit to death for my sake. * 
How shall I bury Thee, O my God? * Or how shall I wrap Thee with winding 
sheets? * With what hands shall I touch Thine undefiled Body? * Or what 
hymns shall I sing at Thy departure, O compassionate One? * I magnify Thy 
Passion; I praise Thy Burial and Resurrection, ** and I cry out: O Lord, glory be 
to Thee.  
Then “Now lettest Thou...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparia, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
 Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
The noble Joseph ..., When Thou didst descend ..., Glory ..., from the 
Menaion, Both now ..., The angel standing ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
SATURDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparia, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when Thou didst 
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens 
cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
 Both now ..., in Tone II:  
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XVI) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos, of the Resurrection, in Tone II: 
Thou didst not prevent the grave stone from being sealed, * and having 
arisen Thou didst grant unto all * the rock of the Faith. ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee! 
Tone II: 
Verse: Arise O Lord my God, let Thine arm be lifted on high, * forget 
not Thy paupers to the end. 
Having never departed from the immaculate bosom * of the Father in the 
highest, * Thou didst accept burial and Resurrection on behalf of all. ** O Lord, 
glory be to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O 
Theotokos; * for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to 
be a true Mother, * having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that 
our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XVII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
The choir of Thy disciples rejoice with one voice together * with the 
myrrhbearing women, * for they celebrate a common feast with them, * unto 
the glory and honour of Thy Resurrection; * and through them we cry to Thee: 
** O Lord and Lover of mankind, grant great mercy unto Thy people.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 
50th Psalm. 
For the Canons, the Canon of the Feast with its Irmos to make eight in each 
Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. After the third Ode, the 
Kontakion, and Sessional Hymns of the Saint. At the sixth Ode, The Kontakion 
of the feast. The Magnificat is sung. After the ninth Ode, the Exapostilarion of 
the Feast. The Canon in Tone II: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Taking up the Song of Moses, O my soul, * cry aloud: * “A helper 
and a protector hath become unto me salvation. * My God, * whom I will 
glorify.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast crucified in the flesh, O Thou Who art passionless by the 
nature of the Father; and Thou was pierced in the side, thereby causing blood 
and water to spring forth for the world. Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
I honour Thy Cross and I glorify Thy Burial, O good One, and I praise and 
worship Thine arising, and I cry out: Thou art our God and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though Thou didst taste of gall, O Thou Who art the sweetness of the 
Church, yet didst Thou cause incorruption to spring forth for us from Thy side. 
Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let Sion rejoice, and let heaven be glad; Christ is risen, having raised up the 
dead who chant: Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having wrapped Thy Body with fine linen, O Christ, Joseph laid Thee, our 
Salvation, in a new sepulcher; and as God, Thou didst raise up the dead. 
Anticipating the dawn, the women beheld Christ, and cried unto the divine 
disciples: Truly Christ is risen; come and praise Him together with us.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarian: O all-holy Trinity, one Godhead, beginningless Unity: Father, 
Son, and divine Spirit, save the world. Thou art our God, and we glorify Thee.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Thou didst loose the ancient curse by thy womb, O modest 
one, by blossoming forth the Blessing for us, when thou didst give birth unto a 
Child. For He is God, though He weareth flesh.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit, * but do Thou show 
me to be fruitful * in Thy compassion O God, * Thou husbandman of all 
good things. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thy palms were nailed to the Cross, O Jesus, Thou didst bring all the 
nations together out of error and didst call them unto knowledge of Thee, O 
Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The people of the Jews cried unto Pilate: Release unto us the villainous 
thief; away with the Sinless One, away with Him, crucify Him!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou wast crucified, O Christ, the light was darkened, the earth was 
shaken, and the many of the dead arose from the grave out of fear of Thy 
power.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
As she stood at the Cross, Thy ewe-lamb cried out with lament, O Jesus: 
Whither goest Thou, my Son? Whither dost Thou depart, O Lamb, Who art 
slain on behalf of all?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
I worship Thy Cross, I praise Thy Burial, I honour Thy Passion, and the 
nails in Thy hands, and the lance, and Thy Resurrection, O Jesus.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou art arisen, O Jesus, the enemy is despoiled, Adam is delivered together 
with Eve from the bonds of corruption by Thy Resurrection.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: I worship and praise the one Nature: the Father, the Son and 
the Upright Spirit, divided in Hypostases and united in Essence.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Blessed art thou, O pure one, who art of the root of Jesse, and 
from whom Christ, the Rod and Blossom, blossomed forth in the flesh for us.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The women brought myrrh * and came unto Thy sepulcher. * Their souls 
filled with joy * on seeing the bright angel’s light. * With great zeal and 
boldness, O Lord, they preached that Thou art the God of all, * and to Thy 
disciples they cried: ** The Life of all hath arisen from the dead.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet foreseeing Thy birth from a virgin, * prophesied 
crying aloud: * “I have heard of Thy report, and I was afraid; * For from 
the South, from the Overshadowed mountain * shalt thou come forth O 
Christ” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
By the Cross Thou didst bind the belly of Hades, and didst raise up the dead 
together with Thyself, and didst destroy the tyranny of death. Wherefore, we 
who are of Adam worship and praise Thy burial and arising, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O our Savior, Whose good pleasure it was, for the sake of Thy 
compassionate mercy to be nailed to the Cross and redeem us from the paternal 
curse, loose the bonds of my many transgressions, for Thou art able to 
accomplish whatsoever Thou dost will.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Thou Who didst nail to the Cross mine ancient curse, and didst cause 
blessing to pour forth for me from Thy side by Thy blood, O Savior, loose 
Thou the bonds of my many transgressions, for Thou art able to accomplish 
whatsoever Thou dost will.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When hades met Thee in the nethermost regions, it was embittered, O 
Savior, seeing that those whom it had the power to devour aforetime, it now 
gave up involuntarily; its depths are searched out, and it is stripped and 
despoiled of its dead.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though the stone was sealed, and the sentry was present, O ye lawless foes, 
yet the Lord arose as He foretold, loosing the bonds of my many transgressions, 
for He is able to accomplish whatsoever He doth will.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Thou Who didst arise from the sepulcher and didst despoil Hades and 
quicken the dead, and didst cause incorruption to flow forth for me by Thine 
arising, loose Thou the bonds of my many transgressions, for Thou art able to 
accomplish whatsoever Thou dost will.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: Who can tell of the immeasurable glory of the Godhead, 
transcendent in essence? for being the Trinity by nature, He is praised as 
beginningless and consubstantial, and is hymned as a Unity in Trinity, in simple 
hypostases.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Do thou unceasingly entreat Him Who dwelt in thy womb, O 
pure Virgin Mother, and Whom thou, the Theotokos, didst bear without 
knowing a man, that He loose the bonds of my many transgressions; for thou 
art able to help in whatsoever thou dost will.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Having dispelled the gloom of my soul, * O my Savior, do Thou 
illumine me * with the light of Thy commandments * for Thou alone art 
the King of peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 10 ---
When Thou wast clothed with me, Thou didst divest me of mine ancient 
garment which, alas! the sower of sin wove for me, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Alas! my sin hath sewn fig leaves for me who by the counsel of the serpent 
have not kept Thine immaculate commandment, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though my soul was wounded by my thieving thoughts, Christ, Who came 
forth from Mary, hath healed, by pouring oil thereon.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Standing by the Cross, the most pure Theotokos called out with a maternal 
voice: Thou hast left me alone, O my Son and God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
By the weapon of Thy Cross Thou hast put down the serpent, the author of 
evil, and by Thine arising Thou hast broken the sting of death, O Jesus.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let Adam also cry out: O Death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy 
victory? Thou art destroyed by the quickening of Him that raiseth the dead.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: Thee, the God and Father, and the Son and the Spirit, do I 
worship, in three hypostases, and I believe the One to be Three, in one essence.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: We the faithful praise thee, who by a seedless conception 
didst give birth in a manner transcending nature, to Christ, the only Master, 
Who hath renewed nature.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am 
overwhelmed by the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the sea-
monster, * so also deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Hades is dead, take courage, O ye earthborn, for while Christ was hanging 
upon the Tree, He cast the sword against him, and he lieth dead; for, being 
stripped naked, he was despoiled of those he held.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Hades hath been despoiled, take courage, O ye dead; and the tombs have 
been opened: arise. Thus did Christ cry unto you from Hades, even He that 
hath come to deliver all from death and corruption.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The dead, which at one time thou didst have the power to devour, and 
which now are demanded of thee, do thou give back to Me, O Hades, crieth 
God, the Giver of life, Who hath come to deliver all from thine insatiate belly.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O ye myrrh-bearing women, why hasten ye now? Why bring ye myrrh unto 
the Living One? Christ is risen, as He foretold. Let your tears cease and be 
changed into joy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The Lord is risen and hath despoiled the enemy, and having plucked out 
them that were in fetters, He hath led forth all, as well as Adam the first-
fashioned, when He raised him up, since He is compassionate and the Lover of 
mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having wrapped Thee in linen, O Christ, the noble Joseph laid Thee in a 
tomb; and having anointed with myrrh the fallen temple of Thy Body, he rolled 
a great stone before the sepulcher.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: O ye faithful, let us praise the Trinity in Unity, glorifying the 
Father with the Son, and the Spirit Who is consubstantial with the Son, and 
Who with the Father is co-beginningless and everlasting God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Like a vineyard didst thou conceive untilled in thy womb the 
Cluster of grapes where from, like wine, there pour forth for us torrents of 
immortality, even eternal life.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Kontakion, in Tone II: 
When Thou didst cry, Rejoice, unto the myrrh-bearers, * Thou didst make 
the lamentation of Eve the first mother * to cease by Thy Resurrection, O 
Christ God. * And Thou didst bid Thine apostles to preach: ** The Savior is 
risen from the grave.  
Ikos: As the myrrh-bearers went to Thy tomb, O Savior, they were 
perplexed in mind and said to themselves: Who will roll the stone away from 
the sepulcher for us? And looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled away. 
They were awestruck by the form of the angel and his raiment. They were taken 
with trembling and thought to flee; and the youth cried unto them: Be not 
afraid; He Whom ye seek is risen; come, behold the place where the body of 
Jesus lay, and go quickly, proclaim unto the disciples: The Savior is risen from 
the grave. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Like unto the cherubim, the children rejoicing in the furnace 
sang: * “Blessed art Thou O God, * for in truth Thou hast brought this 
judgment upon us * because of our sins, * Thou art supremely praised 
and glorified throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou, as the Lover of mankind, wishing to save from error all whom Thou 
hadst fashioned, didst deign to be nailed to the Cross, that by Thy flesh Thou 
mightest renew this image demolished by the passions, O Savior; and despoiling 
Hades, Thou didst raise up the dead with Thyself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross, O compassionate One, Thou 
didst call all unto Thyself, as Thou didst promise, O good One. For in truth 
Thou wast pleased to suffer all these things because of our sins. Wherefore, 
Thou didst also open the gates of Paradise unto the thief, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst raise up the fallen temple of Thy Body from the grave on the 
third day, as Thou didst promise, O good One, that in truth Thou mightest 
make known Thy glory which Thou dost cause to flow for us through faith; and 
thou didst take away those who were in bonds, whom Hades had held of old in 
fetters.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 13 ---
O mindlessness of the Jews! O frenzy of the lawless! What thing did ye see, 
that ye believed not in Christ? For did He not by a word raise up the sick? Or 
did He not Himself save the whole world? At least, let the soldiers or those that 
arose from the dead convince you.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let the guards who became as dead now say: How was He stolen, Whom he 
ungrateful ones in no wise saw? For if they saw Him not arisen, how would they 
ever have perceived how He was stolen? At least, let this stone and Christ’s 
funeral shrouds convince you.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Whom do ye guard as dead? What seals have ye placed upon the stone, O ye 
Jews, who fear the fear of theft? Behold, in truth the grave is sealed. How, 
therefore, did He arise, were Christ not God? * Let them that arose and were 
seen by many convince you.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: With the Father we glorify the Son and the Holy Spirit, crying 
with unceasing voice: O Trinity, single essence, have mercy, save us all, Thou 
Who art a Unity in three Hypostases; have compassion on us, O God, Who art 
glorified throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: O most pure One, how, except in a manner as He willed and as 
He knew, didst thou contain in thy womb a Child before Whom the hosts of 
angels tremble, since He is God? He dwelt among us, wishing to save all the 
earthborn of Adam and to loose Adam from that curse which came from the 
bitter tasting.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * unto 
Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless and 
supremely exult throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 14 ---
The beams of the sun withdrew themselves in fear before the sufferings of 
Christ, and the dead arose, and the mountains shook, and the earth trembled, 
and Hades was laid bare.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The thrice-blessed children who were in the furnace of old, raising up their 
hands, prefigured Thine immaculate Cross, O good One, whereby Thou didst 
cast down the might of the enemy, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O ye blind Jews, deceivers and transgressors, who disbelieved Christ’s 
arising as though it were a lie: What do ye see that is unbelievable? that Christ, 
Who raised up the dead, is risen?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Who is it that withered the fig tree? Who is it that healed the withered hand? 
Who is it that once filled the multitude in the wilderness? Is it not Christ God, 
Who raised up the dead?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Who is it that raised the four-day dead from the grave, and the son of the 
widow? Who is it that, as God, strengthened the paralytic on his bed? Is it not 
Christ God, Who raised up the dead?  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The stone itself crieth, the seals call out; when ye placed them, ye appointed 
a watch to guard the tomb. Truly Christ is risen, and He liveth throughout the 
ages.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: We glorify the Son and the Holy Spirit together with the Father, 
even the Holy Trinity in one Godhead and we cry: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou 
throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  
Theotokion: Without suffering change, thou didst give birth unto One, even 
Christ God, Who is twofold of nature, Who, as the ever-living Bread, was 
fashioned without fashioning in thy womb, according to our fashion.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and 
supremely exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: In a manner surpassing nature, * the Word who timelessly shone 
forth from the Father, * hath been conceived within a womb, * according 
to the flesh, * O ye faithful with never silent hymns let us magnify Him. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the thief recognized Thee as God upon the Cross, Thou didst make 
him an heir of the noetic Paradise, as he cried out: Remember me, O Almighty 
Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast smitten for our sake, Thou wast spat upon by the lawless men, O 
Jesus, Who didst inscribe the tablets of the Law on Mount Sinai for Thy servant 
Moses.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou was pierced in Thy life-creating side, O Christ, and Thou didst cause 
Thine immaculate Blood and the precious Water to flow forth as an ever-living 
fount for the world.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast accounted among the dead, O Thou Who didst quicken the 
dead; Thou wast laid in a grave, Who didst empty the graves; Thou didst despoil 
Hades, O Thou Who didst resurrect Adam.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Glory be to Thee, O Christ Savior, Who didst cause life to flow forth, and 
the light to shine upon those in the darkness of ignorance, and Who hast 
illumined the whole world by Thine arising.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let us acclaim the wondrous Joseph, as well as Nicodemus and the faithful 
myrrh-bearers, O ye faithful, as we cry out: The Lord is truly risen. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, Our God, Glory be to Thee  
Trinitarion: Thou art beginningless, O Father; uncreated art Thou, O Son; 
of equal rank is the Spirit; the Three being One by nature and Three in 
Hypostases, even one true God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: Let Jesse rejoice and let David dance, for behold, the Virgin, 
the rod planted by God, hath blossomed forth the Flower, even the everlasting 
Christ.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion: 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and do thou exult, O 
pure Theotokos, in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on 
the third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Feast.  
Hearken, ye women, and give ear unto the voice of joy, for I have trampled 
down tyrant Hades and raised the world from corruption. Hasten ye quickly and 
proclaim the gladsome tidings to My friends; for I have willed that joy shine 
forth thence upon all My creation from whence there first came sorrow. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone II: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Everything that hath breath and every creature doth glorify Thee, O Lord, * 
for through Thy Cross Thou hast destroyed death * and thus shown the 
multitude of peoples Thy Resurrection from the dead, ** as Thou alone lovest 
mankind. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Let the Jews tell how the soldiers lost the King they were guarding. * Why 
then did the stone not guard the rock of life? * Either let them give up the one 
who was buried or adore Him as risen, * exclaiming together with us: * “Glory 
to the multitude of Thy mercies: ** O Savior, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
Rejoice O ye peoples and be glad! * for an angel sat upon the grave stone * 
and hath given us good tidings saying: * “Christ is risen from the dead * and 
hath filled the universe with sweet fragrance. ** Rejoice O ye peoples and be 
glad!” 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Before Thy conception, O Lord, * an angel brought the greeting “Rejoice” 
to the one full of grace: * at Thy Resurrection an angel rolled away the stone 
from Thy glorious grave. * The one revealed the signs of joy instead of sorrow; 
* the other instead of death hath proclaimed to us the Master, and giver of life. 
* Wherefore we cry unto Thee, * “O Benefactor of all mankind, ** Lord, glory 
be to Thee!” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary * came unto the tomb, seeking the 
Lord. * And they beheld an angel like unto lightning sitting upon the stone, * 
and saying unto them: * Why seek ye the Living among the dead? * He hath 
arisen as He said; * ye shall find Him in Galilee. * Wherefore let us cry unto 
Him: ** O Thou Who didst arise from the dead, Lord, glory be to Thee.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
When the Arimathaean took Thee down dead from the Tree, * he prepared 
Thee, the Life of all, * with fine linen and myrrh, * and compelled by love, * he 
desired to kiss Thine incorrupt Body. * But restrained by fear * he cried aloud 
to Thee with joy: * Glory be to Thy condescension, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Thou hast been gracious, O Lord, unto Thy land; * Thou hast 
turned back the captivity of Jacob. 
When Thou hadst been laid in a new tomb * for the sake of all mankind, * 
O Thou Who art the Redeemer of all, * Hades the most farcical having beheld 
Thee shook with fear, * for the bars thereof were destroyed; * the gates there 
were shattered, and the dead arose. * Adam filled with thanksgiving, * joyously 
cried out to Thee: ** Glory be to Thy condescension, O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Mercy and truth are met together, * righteousness and peace have 
kissed each other. 
When the hosts of heaven, beheld Thee O Christ, * slandered as a deceiver 
and sealed within a new tomb, * with a stone placed thereupon by the same 
hands, * which pierced Thine immaculate side, O Lord, * they stood in 
amazement * at Thine inexpressible long-suffering and love. * But when they 
saw that we were thus saved, * in their joy they cried out to Thee: * Glory be to 
Thy condescension, O Thou Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Joseph asked for the Body of Jesus * and laid it in his own new sepulcher; * 
for it was meet that He should come forth from the grave, * as from a bridal 
chamber. * O Thou Who hast crushed the might of death * and hast opened 
the gates of Paradise unto mankind, ** glory be to Thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparia, in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Glory ..., Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then didst Thou 
slay Hades with the lightning of Thy Godhead. * And when Thou didst also 
raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of the heavens cried 
aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
Both now ..., Tone II:  
The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing women, * 
“Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a stranger to 
corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the world great 
mercy!” 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
The noble Joseph ..., When Thou didst descend ..., Glory ..., from the 
Menaion, Both now ..., The angel standing ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
SATURDAY OF THE THIRD WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, at the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IX of the Canon. 
When the thief recognized Thee as God upon the Cross, Thou didst make 
him an heir of the noetic Paradise, as he cried out: Remember me, O Almighty 
Savior.  
Thou wast smitten for our sake, Thou wast spat upon by the lawless men, O 
Jesus, Who didst inscribe the tablets of the Law on Mount Sinai for Thy servant 
Moses.  
Thou was pierced in Thy life-creating side, O Christ, and Thou didst cause 
Thine immaculate Blood and the precious Water to flow forth as an ever-living 
fount for the world.  
Thou wast accounted among the dead, O Thou Who didst quicken the 
dead; Thou wast laid in a grave, Who didst empty the graves; Thou didst despoil 
Hades, O Thou Who didst resurrect Adam.  
Trinitarion: Thou art beginningless, O Father; uncreated art Thou, O Son; 
of equal rank is the Spirit; the Three being One by nature and Three in 
Hypostases, even one true God.  
Theotokion: Let Jesse rejoice and let David dance, for behold, the Virgin, 
the rod planted by God, hath blossomed forth the Flower, even the everlasting 
Christ.  
At the Entrance, the Troparia for the Feast in Tone II: 
The noble Joseph having taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, * 
wrapped it in a fine linen shroud * covering it with fragrant spices * and placed 
it in a new sepulcher; * but on the third day Thou didst arise, O Lord, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Tone II: When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, * then 
didst Thou slay Hades with the radiant brilliance of Thy divinity. * And when 
Thou didst also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, * all the hosts of 
the heavens cried aloud: ** “O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee.”  
Tone II: The angel standing by the tomb cried unto the myrrh-bearing 
women, * “Myrrh is fitting for the dead, * but Christ hath been revealed a 
stranger to corruption. * rather Cry aloud: The Lord is risen, ** granting the 
world great mercy!” 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, if there be 
any. Otherwise: 
 Both now ..., Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone II: 
When Thou didst cry, Rejoice, unto the myrrh-bearers, * Thou didst make 
the lamentation of Eve the first mother * to cease by Thy Resurrection, O 
Christ God. * And Thou didst bid Thine apostles to preach: ** The Savior is 
risen from the grave.  
The Trisagion, then: 
The Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone: Save, O Lord, Thy people * and 
bless Thine inheritance. 
Verse: Unto Thee, O Lord, Will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto 
me.  
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 9:19 - 31) 
In those days, Saul was with the disciples which were at Damascus. And 
straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God. 
But all that heard him were amazed, and said; Is not this he that destroyed them 
which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he 
might bring them bound unto the chief priests? But Saul increased the more in 
strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this 
is very Christ. And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to 
kill him: But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates 
day and night to kill him. Then the disciples took him by night, and let him 
down by the wall in a basket. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed 
to join himself to the disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not 
that he was a disciple. But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, 
and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had 
spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of 
Jesus. And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem. And he 
spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: 
but they went about to slay him. Which when the brethren knew, they brought 
him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus. Then had the churches 
rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria, and were edified; and 
walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were 
multiplied. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Alleluia in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Thou hast been gracious, O Lord, unto Thy land; Thou hast 
turned back the captivity of Jacob.. 
Verse: Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have 
kissed each other. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (15:17 - 16:2) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: These things I command you, that ye love 
one another. If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated 
you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are 
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world 
hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater 
than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they 
have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do 
unto you for my name’s sake, because they know not him that sent me. If I had 
not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no 
cloak for their sin. He that hateth me hateth my Father also. If I had not done 
among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but 
now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father. But this cometh to 
pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me 
without a cause. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you 
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he 
shall testify of me: And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me 
from the beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be 
offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that 
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
