--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. No Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion: in Tone VIII: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O most glorious wonder! * The Maker of all hath assumed flesh, * wishing 
to become a man in His loving compassion, * showing the Hebrews a wealth of 
miracles. * Wherefore at Bethesda’s pool, * He wrought healing * upon the 
paralytic man, * saying unto him: ** Take up thy bed and walk. 
O Savior, my Lord and God, * since Thou didst will to restore fallen 
mankind, * as a man Thou didst wander the earth * curing all manner of 
infirmities, * for the sake of The abundance of Thy loving compassion. * Thus 
having come to the porch of the Sheep’s Pool, * Thou, by Thy word, didst raise 
up the paralytic, * who had lain prostrate ** for thirty and eight years. 
Utterly consumed with jealousy, * the Hebrews brought guilt upon 
themselves * making Thy good works, O supremely good Lord, * an occasion 
and excuse for their bitter and frenzied rage. * While they themselves ceased 
not to transgress the Law, * they sought to slay Thee, Who art the Life of all; * 
for on the Sabbath day, * Thou didst show forth as a man completely whole ** 
him who aforetime had been a paralytic. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
At the Sheep’s Pool a man lay there infirm; * and upon seeing Thee, O 
Lord, he cried: * I have no man, that, when the water is troubled, * to lift me 
and place me therein. * But when I go, another goeth before me * and receiveth 
healing, * and straightway, the Savior had compassion upon him, * saying unto 
him: * For thee I became a man, * for thee I have been clothed in flesh, * and 
sayest thou: I have no man? * Take up thy bed and walk. * All things are 
possible for Thee, * all things are obedient to Thee, * all things are subject to 
Thee. * Remember us all and have mercy on us, O Holy One, ** since Thou 
lovest mankind. 
“O joyous light ...,” 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:  
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the 
Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house 
of our God. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone III: 
 By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been 
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved 
by faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Hymn of Compunction: An evening hymn do we offer unto Thee, O Christ, 
* with incense and spiritual hymns. ** O Savior, have mercy on our souls. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: O Lord, in truth great is the power of Thy Cross, * for affixed 
in one place, * it doth manifest itself throughout the world; * and from 
fishermen hath it shown forth apostles, * and from the nations, martyrs, ** that 
for our souls they all might offer intercession. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Thou Who by Thy most pure hand didst fashion mankind, * O 
compassionate One, * didst come to heal the sick, O Christ. * By Thy word 
Thou didst raise up the paralytic by the Sheep’s Pool. * And didst cure the 
ailment of the blood-streaming woman. * Upon the tormented daughter of the 
Canaanitish woman Thou wast merciful, * and the request of the centurion 
Thou didst not disdain. * For this cause we cry unto Thee: ** O Almighty Lord, 
glory be to Thee.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O Sovereign Lady, thou foremost holy and pure boast of the heavenly ranks, 
* thou hymn of the apostles and fulfillment of the prophets: ** accept thou our 
supplications.  
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let the heavens ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O Sovereign Lady, thou foremost holy and pure boast of the heavenly ranks, 
* thou hymn of the apostles and fulfillment of the prophets: ** accept thou our 
supplications.  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. IV) The following Sessional Hymns 
from the Oktoechos, in Tone III: 
Christ hath arisen from the dead, * the first fruits of those that sleep. * The 
First-born of creation * and Creator of all that hath come to be, * hath renewed 
in Himself the corrupted nature of our race. * Death, no longer art thou lord, ** 
for the Master of all things hath destroyed thy dominion.  
Verse: O Lord condemn me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
A Hymn of Compunction: Whilst thou dost yet sojourn upon the earth, * 
repent, O my soul; * for dust in the grave doth not give praise * nor doth it 
redeem from offences; * thus, cry unto Christ God: * O Knower of hearts, I 
have sinned; * before Thou dost condemn me, have mercy on me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
The Martyricon: The stout-heartedness of your patience * hath vanquished 
the devices of the enemy, the originator of evil, * O blessed passion-bearers; * 
for this cause, ye were deemed worthy of eternal blessedness. * But intercede ye 
before the Lord, * that He save the flock of Christ-loving people, ** O ye 
witnesses to the truth. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
 Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy 
purity, * Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of 
praise can I offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and 
stand in awe. * Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of 
grace. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. V) Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Those who were bound fast by envy’s wickedness * grew faint with jealousy 
when they saw Jesus * heal the paralytic on the Sabbath day, * saying unto Him, 
“Thou dost transgress the law * by performing cures on this day, * breaking the 
Sabbath rest handed down by our fathers.” * They knew not that Thou art the 
Master of the Law, ** and the Healer of our souls.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th 
Psalm. 
For the Canons: The Canon of the Feast of the Paralytic with its Irmos to 
make eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. After 
the third Ode, the Kontakion and Sessional Hymns of the Saint then the 
Sessional hymn of the Paralytic. After the sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of 
the Paralytic, After the 9th Ode, the Exapostilarion of Pascha and the Paralytic. 
The Canon in Tone III: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Wondrous art Thou, O God, * Who gloriously workest wonders, * 
Who didst fashion the earth from the abyss, * and didst cover the chariots 
and save the people who sing to Thee * as our King and God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Working signs and doing wonders, O only King, Thou didst willingly endure 
the Cross, since Thou art compassionate; and having put death to death by 
death, Thou didst quicken us.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let us dance for joy with faith today on the arising of Christ, O ye peoples. 
Hades hath been despoiled of them that he held in bonds, and he hastily 
surrendered them, as they praised the mighty deeds of God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 6 ---
O Thou Who by divine might didst once heal the paralytic by Thy word, O 
Christ, and didst command him who had been ailing for many years to take up 
his bed, heal Thou my soul, which doth grievously ail.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Of old an angel came down to the Sheep’s Pool and healed one man each 
year; but now Christ doth cleanse endless multitudes by divine Baptism.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O leader of the angels and supreme Commander of the Ministers on high, 
do thou shelter and protect from all manner of temptations them that are 
gathered together in thine honored temple, praising God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: With the Bodiless ones, let us unceasingly praise the 
Beginningless God, Who is in three Hypostases and one Nature, even the 
Father, Word, and Spirit, Who hath a Kingdom and indivisible power.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Do thou save from dangers, conquest of barbarians, civil war 
and the sword, and every other danger, this thy flock, which doth ever faithfully 
honour thee, O pure one.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O ye people; 
* Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and from earth to 
heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: O barren and infertile soul, * bring forth a crop of glorious fruit 
and cry with joy: * I have been firmly established by Thee O God; * there 
is none holy and none righteous save Thee, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When of old the sun beheld Thee hanging upon the Tree, O Word, the light 
withdrew and all the earth was troubled; the dead arose when Thou didst 
repose, O almighty One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst go into the womb of the earth with Thy soul, Hades 
hastily gave forth the souls which it possessed, who cried unto Thy might a 
song of thanksgiving, O only Lord.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Do Thou, O supremely good One, heal my soul, which hath been ailing 
grievously for many years, as Thou didst once heal the paralytic, that I may walk 
in Thy way, which Thou dost show unto them that long for Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Together with the Hosts on high, O Archangel of God, make supplication 
for us who praise thee with faith, preserving and protecting us from falling into 
the passions of life.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Let us cry: Glory to the Father, the Son and the Spirit, for by 
nature God is one, Whom all the powers of the heavens glorify in fear, crying: 
Holy, Holy, Holy.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Seedless was thy conception, and transcending understanding 
was thy childbirth, O immaculate Virgin Mother; an awesome deed, an 
exceeding great wonder, honored by the angels and glorified by mortal men, O 
Lady and maiden.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
A word alone made strong the paralytic, * since it had been uttered by the 
universal Word, * Who had appeared upon the earth out of His love and 
compassion. * Wherefore, he departed hence and went forth bearing his own 
bed, * and the scribes, although they saw this great deed which was brought to 
pass, * since they were held by evil and palsied ** in soul by their envy, they 
endured not.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine 
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come 
forth from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely 
overshadowed. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Consumed by envy, the multitude of the Hebrews crucified Thee on the 
Tree, O Lord; and having annulled the condemnation of death, Thou didst arise 
as One mighty, raising up the world together with Thyself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Why seek ye with myrrh the inexhaustible Myrrh, O ye women? He is risen, 
said he that sat in white apparel, and He hath filled the world with spiritual 
fragrance.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Taking upon Thyself the likeness of a servant, out of the excess of Thy 
compassion didst Thou come and didst make whole him who had been 
bedridden for many years, O Word, commanding him to take up his bed.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
An angel of the Lord at a certain season came down and troubled the water 
in the Sheep’s Pool, making whole one person only. But Christ doth save 
endless multitudes by divine baptism.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O leader of the angels and guide of the erring, O supreme Commander of 
the Lord, come into our midst at this hour, and bear the prayers of us all unto 
the only Creator and Master.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: The Holy Trinity is united in nature, divided in Hypostases; 
being the super-essential Father, the co-eternal Son and the Holy and Only 
Almighty Spirit.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: How is it that thou dost suckle a babe, O pure one? How dost 
thou give birth to a child more ancient than Adam? How dost thou carry in 
thine arms a Son, Who is seated upon the shoulders of the cherubim? As He 
alone knoweth, as He understandeth, even He that hath given existence to all 
that is.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: By Thine unwaning light, O Christ, * do Thou illumine my 
humble soul * and guide it in Thy fear * for Thy commandments are 
light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree of the Cross, thereby raising the whole 
world together with Thyself; and becoming One among the dead, O God, Thou 
hast raised up them that were dead from all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Christ is risen, as He said, having emptied the realms of Hades, and He hath 
appeared unto the apostles, granting them everlasting joy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The angel was seen by the women to be as brilliant as lightning and as white 
as snow, saying: Weep not; our Life hath arisen and quickened them that were 
dead in the graves.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Even as Thou didst raise up the paralytic, O Christ, so also raise up my soul 
which is palsied by transgressions, and grant that I may fare well as I walk in 
Thine upright ways.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Michael, Leader of the angels, do thou save the people who are gathered 
today in thy temple, and who proclaim the mighty deeds of God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Of equal honour is the threefold Unity: Divided piously in 
hypostases, but united in nature is the Father, the Son and the divine Spirit.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy seedless childbearing, O pure one, and thine 
incomprehensible birthgiving do we praise, while blessing thee as the Mother of 
the Creator and Master of all.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, * the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss of the passions and a storm of adverse winds * have 
risen up against me. * But do Thou make haste, O Savior, * to save me, 
and deliver me from corruption, * as Thou didst deliver the prophet from 
the sea-monster. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Of Thine own will Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, and laid as one dead 
in the sepulcher, and having quickened together all those who were dead in 
Hades, O Christ, Thou didst raise them by Thy divine power.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Hades met Thee below, O compassionate One, it was embittered, 
and in haste it gave up those whom it held in bonds, who with unceasing voices 
praise Thine awesome Resurrection, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
On beholding Christ, the Life of all, arisen from the grave, the divine 
disciples worshipped Him with love, upright knowledge, and joyfulness of soul.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When he who laid for many years upon a bed of affliction was made whole 
by Thy command, O Christ, he glorified and praised Thy compassion, O Giver 
of life.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Michael, leader of the angels, as thou standest before the throne of the 
Master, be thou present in our midst, guiding toward the paths of life those 
who possess thee as a fervent protector.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Together with the awesome Hosts on high I reverence Thee, 
Who art a Trinity in Hypostases; I proclaim Thee, Who art a Unity in essence, 
O beginningless Father, Son and Upright Spirit, God of all things.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: He that sustaineth all things by His divine command is held in 
thine arms, O Virgin Theotokos, and since He is compassionate He doth rescue 
us from the enslaving hand of the evil one.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone III: 
As of old Thou didst raise up the paralytic, O Lord God, * by Thy divine 
care and might, raise up my soul which is palsied * by diverse sins and 
transgressions * and by unseemly deeds and acts, that, saved, I may also cry out: 
* O compassionate One, ** glory be to Thy dominion and might O Christ. 
 Ikos: O Thou Who holdest the ends of the earth in the palm of Thy hand, 
O Jesus our God, Who art co-beginningless with the Father, and Who, together 
with the Holy Spirit dost rule over all things: Thou didst appear in the flesh, 
healing infirmities, driving away passions, and giving sight to the blind. And, by 
a divine word, Thou didst raise up the paralytic, commanding him to walk 
straightway and to take up upon his shoulders his bed, which aforetime had 
borne him. Wherefore, together with him we all praise Thee and cry: O 
compassionate One, glory to Thy dominion and might O Christ. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the furnace * and save the children from its 
flames: * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord the God of our 
fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
On seeing Thee stretched out upon the Tree, the sun withdrew its light, not 
having the strength to shine upon the world when Thou, O King of all, wast 
setting, so that all the nations might be enlightened.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst arise, thereby emptying the tombs and despoiling Hades by 
Thine almighty power. Wherefore we praise Thine honored and divine arising, 
O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Why seek ye the Living as one dead? He is risen, He is not in the grave: 
Thus did the divine angel of old, who was like unto lightning, cry unto the 
myrrh-bearers.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Having, by Thy word, made whole the paralytic who had been bedridden 
for many years, Thou didst cry aloud: Take up thy bed and walk, praising God’s 
mighty deeds.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Michael, supreme Commander of the Lord, by thy mediation do thou 
guide and shelter from all manner of evil those who are gathered in thy temple 
with faith unto the praise of God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: O Trinity, since Thou art the God and Master of all, do Thou 
save from diverse perils us who praise Thee with faith, and make us partakers of 
Thy blessings.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: After ineffably bearing Him Who without change was begotten 
of the beginningless Father before all ages, thou didst remain a virgin; for this 
cause we bless thee, O pure one.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children from the furnace, * became 
man, suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth clothe 
mortality with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only blessed and 
most glorious * God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: God is unceasingly glorified on high by the angels, * O ye heaven 
of heavens, * ye earth and mountains, ye plains and abysses, * and all the 
race of mankind, * with hymns as to the Creator and Redeemer, * bless 
ye, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The veil was rent in twain when Thou wast crucified, O our Savior, and 
death gave up the dead which it had devoured; and Hades was stripped bare 
when it saw Thee coming into the nethermost regions of the earth.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy victory? Thou wast put 
to death and destroyed by the risen King. No longer dost thou reign; for the 
mighty One hath taken away those whom thou didst have in bondage.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Run quickly and proclaim the Resurrection unto the apostles, said the youth 
who appeared unto the myrrh-bearers. The Master is risen, and, in a marvelous 
manner, those dead from all ages have arisen together with Him.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having lain bedridden for many years, the paralytic cried: Have mercy on 
me, who am oppressed by need, O Redeemer. And He commandeth him to 
take up his bed in haste and walk upright.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
As the Leader of the Immaterial Hosts, O supreme Commander, pray 
together with them that we be granted deliverance from our offences, 
correction of life, and the enjoyment of everlasting good things yonder.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: With one accord let us praise the uncreated, undivided Essence, 
the Godhead of three Hypostases, the beginningless God the Father, the Son 
and Holy Spirit, as we cry out the awesome melody of the seraphim.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Of old Isaiah beheld thee as a book, O Ever-virgin, wherein, by 
the finger of the Father, the timeless Word was inscribed, Who doth save from 
all irrationality us who praise thee with sacred words.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * 
wherein we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who 
didst conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet 
remained unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the 
hand of man, * and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed 
forth * from the root of David. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, O Jesus, thereby raising us up 
together with Thyself. And when of Thine own will Thou wast laid in the tomb, 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Thou didst raise from the tombs all the dead who praised Thine 
incomprehensible power and Thine invincible might.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst dawn forth from the grave as One most comely, like a 
bridegroom from a bridal chamber, O most comely Word; and Thou didst 
dispel the gloom of Hades, leading forth those who were in bonds, and who 
cried with one accord: Glory be to Thy glory, glory be to Thine arising, O Jesus 
our God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Bringing their tears and sighs mingled together with myrrh, the women 
came with haste unto Thine all-holy sepulcher. And through faith they were 
instructed concerning the glorious arising of Christ, which we celebrate, as we 
rejoice in gladness of soul.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Bodily health followed Thy command, O Christ, and the former paralytic 
was seen walking with haste and bearing his bed whereon he had lain for many 
years, and he praised Thy great might.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Pray for our enlightenment, O great supreme Commander, who dost ever 
stand in the presence of the great Light, that our life may be peaceful, for it is 
ever troubled by the assaults of the serpent and by the circumstances of life, O 
right glorious one.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Most reverently do I glorify Thee, O Light and Lights, O Life 
and Lives, O Father, Word and Holy Spirit, tri-hypostatic Unity, indivisible 
Dominion, uncommingled Godhead; and together with the Hosts on high, I cry 
out: Holy, Holy, Holy.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Christ, the great Sun, came forth from thy light-bearing womb, 
and with brilliant rays enlightened the world, O immaculate one, and dispelled 
the darkness of our transgressions. Wherefore, we praise thee, since thou art the 
cause of all good things, O Bride of God.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on the 
third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, * Salvation of the world! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Feast  
The Lover of mankind, the all-compassionate Lord, drew nigh and stood at 
the Sheep’s Pool that He might heal men’s diseases; and there He found a man 
who had lain bed-ridden, and enfeebled for many years. And He cried aloud 
unto him, saying: Take up thy bed now, and go forth; walk in the upright and 
straight paths.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone III: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Come all ye nations, * acknowledge the power of the dread mystery; * for 
Christ our Savior, the beginningless Word, * was crucified for us and was 
willingly buried * and arose from the dead * to save the whole universe. ** Him 
let us worship. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: Come all ye nations ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
A Hymn of Compunction: Many times, as I offer praise, I am found 
committing sin; * for with my tongue I pronounce hymns of praise, * yet in my 
soul I contemplate unseemly things; * but do Thou correct them both through 
repentance, ** O Christ God, and save me. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Martyricon: Come, all ye peoples, let us honor the memory of the holy 
passion-bearers; for they became a spectacle unto angels and men, and received 
from Christ the crown of victory, and they intercede on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 

--- PAGE 16 ---
The paralytic, who was like unto an unburied dead man, * saw Thee and 
cried aloud: * Have mercy upon me, O Lord, * for my bed hath become my 
grave. * Of what profit then is my life? * I have no need for the Sheep’s Pool, * 
for when the waters are troubled * there is none to lift and place me therein. * 
But I come unto Thee, O Source of healings, * that together with all I may cry 
aloud: ** O Almighty Lord, glory be to Thee.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III: 
Beholding the power of Thy signs and miracles, * those who were palsied by 
their envy * and mighty in their wickedness * believed Thee not to be the Son 
of God, * and the Sovereign Lord of all things, ** Who by Thy word didst 
wholly heal the paralytic.  
Verse: Of Thy mercies, O Lord, will I sing forever. * Unto generation 
and generation will I declare Thy truth with my mouth. 
The scribes, who kept the Sabbath, * saw the man who had been long 
paralyzed * strengthened on the Sabbath, * and showing their souls to be weak 
with pride; * though blameless in the Law, * they cried aloud: ** It is not proper 
To heal on the Sabbath day. 
Verse: For Thou hast said: Mercy shall be built up for ever. * In the 
heavens shall Thy truth be established. 
Those who kept the Sabbath * did not recognized Thee the Sabbath’s Lord, 
* murmuring at the strengthening of the paralytic, * which came about on the 
Sabbath; * Wherefore they cried aloud, saying: ** It is not meet to carry thy bed 
upon the Sabbath day. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Jesus went up to Jerusalem to the Sheep’s Pool, * which by the Hebrews is 
called Bethesda, having five porches. * Therein lay a multitude of the ailing; * 
for an angel of God went down each season and troubled the water, * granting 
healing unto those who drew nigh in faith. * And the Lord, on seeing a man 
who had been there for many years, * said unto him: Dost thou wish to be 
made whole? * And the sick man replied: Sir, I have no man, * when the water 
is troubled, to lift and place me into the pool. * I have wasted all my substance 

--- PAGE 17 ---
on physicians * and was not deemed worthy of mercy. * But the Physician of 
both souls and bodies said unto him: * Take up thy bed and walk, and proclaim 
My might and great mercy ** unto the ends of the earth.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III: 
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin 
Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in 
the flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in 
that He is the Lover of mankind. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let the heavens ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
MONDAY OF THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE I of the Canon. 
Working signs and doing wonders, O only King, Thou didst willingly endure 
the Cross, since Thou art compassionate; and having put death to death by 
death, Thou didst quicken us.  
Let us dance for joy with faith today on the arising of Christ, O ye peoples. 
Hades hath been despoiled of them that he held in bonds, and he hastily 
surrendered them, as they praised the mighty deeds of God.  
O Thou Who by divine might didst once heal the paralytic by Thy word, O 
Christ, and didst command him who had been ailing for many years to take up 
his bed, heal Thou my soul, which doth grievously ail.  
O leader of the angels and supreme Commander of the Ministers on high, 
do thou shelter and protect from all manner of temptations them that are 
gathered together in thine honored temple, praising God.  
With the Bodiless ones, let us unceasingly praise the Beginningless God, 
Who is in three Hypostases and one Nature, even the Father, Word, and Spirit, 
Who hath a Kingdom and indivisible power.  
Theotokion: Do thou save from dangers, conquest of barbarians, civil war 
and the sword, and every other danger, this thy flock, which doth ever faithfully 
honour thee, O pure one.  
At the Entrance The Troparion for the Feast, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, if there be 
any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone III: 
As of old Thou didst raise up the paralytic, O Lord God, * by Thy divine 
care and might, raise up my soul which is palsied * by diverse sins and 
transgressions * and by unseemly deeds and acts, that, saved, I may also cry out: 
* O Compassionate Redeemer, O Christ, ** glory to Thy dominion and might. 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon: Great is our Lord, and great is His strength, * and of His 
understanding there is no measure. 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our God. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 3:19 - 26) 
In those days: There was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius, a 
centurion of the band called the Italian band, A devout man, and one that 
feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed 
to God alway. He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an 
angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. And when he 
looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, 
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. And now 
send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter: He lodgeth 
with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea side: he shall tell thee what 
thou oughtest to do. And when the angel which spake unto Cornelius was 
departed, he called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them 
that waited on him continually; And when he had declared all these things unto 
them, he sent them to Joppa. On the morrow, as they went on their journey, 
and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the 
sixth hour: And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they 
made ready, he fell into a trance, And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel 
descending upon him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and 
let down to the earth: Wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the 
earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air. And there came 
a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have 
never eaten any thing that is common or unclean. And the voice spake unto 
him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou 
common. This was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into 
heaven. 
 Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (6:56 - 69) 
The Lord spake unto disciples saying: He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh 
my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. As the living Father hath sent me, and I 
live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is that 
bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and 
are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever. These things said he in 
the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. Many therefore of his disciples, 
when they had heard this, said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it? When 
Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth 
this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he 
was before? It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the 
words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. But there are some 
of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that 
believed not, and who should betray him. And he said, Therefore said I unto 
you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my 
Father. From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more 
with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon 
Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal 
life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living 
God. 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted: 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
The Communion Hymn:  
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality.  
Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
