--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 6th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Thou Who by Thy most pure hand didst fashion mankind, * O 
compassionate One, * didst come to heal the sick, O Christ. * By Thy word 
Thou didst raise up the paralytic by the Sheep’s Pool. * And didst cure the 
ailment of the blood-streaming woman. * Upon the tormented daughter of the 
Canaanitish woman Thou wast merciful, * and the request of the centurion 
Thou didst not disdain. * For this cause we cry unto Thee: ** O Almighty Lord, 
glory be to Thee. (Twice) 
The paralytic, who was like unto an unburied dead man, * saw Thee and 
cried aloud: * Have mercy upon me, O Lord, * for my bed hath become my 
grave. * Of what profit then is my life? * I have no need for the Sheep’s Pool, * 
for when the waters are troubled * there is none to lift and place me therein. * 
But I come unto Thee, O Source of healings, * that together with all I may cry 
aloud: ** O Almighty Lord, glory be to Thee.  
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Jesus went up to Jerusalem to the Sheep’s Pool, * which by the Hebrews is 
called Bethesda, having five porches. * Therein lay a multitude of the ailing; * 
for an angel of God went down each season and troubled the water, * granting 
healing unto those who drew nigh in faith. * And the Lord, on seeing a man 
who had been there for many years, * said unto him: Dost thou wish to be 
made whole? * And the sick man replied: Sir, I have no man, * when the water 
is troubled, to lift and place me into the pool. * I have wasted all my substance 
on physicians * and was not deemed worthy of mercy. * But the Physician of 
both souls and bodies said unto him: * Take up thy bed and walk, and proclaim 
My might and great mercy ** unto the ends of the earth. 
“O joyous light ...,” 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou 
didst hearken unto me. 
 Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone III: 
All things have been enlightened by Thy Resurrection, O Lord, * and 
Paradise hath been opened again. * And acclaiming Thee, the Whole of creation 
** doth ever offer praise unto Thee. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
A Hymn of Compunction: Save me, O Lord my God, * for Thou art the 
salvation of all. * The tempest of the passions disquieteneth me, * and the 
burden of mine iniquities doth submerge me. * Grant me a helping hand, and 
raise me up * unto the light of compunction, ** since Thou alone art 
compassionate and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: O Christ, truly great is the power of Thy martyrs, * who drive 
off evil spirits, * for though they lie in sepulchers; * they vanquish the power of 
the adversary, ** by faith in the Holy Trinity contesting for the sake of piety. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
In Solomon’s Porch there lay a multitude of impotent folk, * and at Mid-
feast Christ found there a paralytic * who had been bedridden for thirty and 
eight years. * To him He called out with the voice of authority: * Wouldst thou 
be made whole? * And the infirm one replied: Sir, I have no man, * that upon 
the troubling of the water, * may lift and place me into the pool. * Whereupon 
He saith unto him: Take up thy bed. * Behold, thou art become whole, sin no 
more. * By the intercessions of the Theotokos, O Lord, ** send down to us Thy 
great mercy.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without seed didst thou conceive by the Holy Spirit; * and glorifying thee, 
we hymn thee: ** Rejoice, most holy Virgin!  
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let the heavens ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TUESDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without seed didst thou conceive by the Holy Spirit; * and glorifying thee, 
we hymn thee: ** Rejoice, most holy Virgin!  
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VII) The following Sessional Hymns 
from the Oktoechos, in Tone III: 
 Having tasted death in the flesh, O Lord, * Thou hast blotted out the 
bitterness of death by Thine arising * strengthening mankind against it, * and 
announcing the abolition of the ancient curse. ** Defender of our lives, O 
Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: O Lord condemn me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
How long, O my soul, wilt thou persist in thine offences? * How long wilt 
before thou dost undertake repentance? * Bring to mind the judgment that is to 
come, * and cry unto the Lord saying: ** I have sinned, O sinless One, have 
mercy on me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: By faith ye have shone forth, O Saints, * supremely radiant 
luminaries, * lovers of godly piety, all-famed passion-bearers. * For by having 
courage before the tyrants’ tortures, * ye cast down the deception of idolatry, ** 
since ye had the Cross as an invincible trophy of the truth. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Thou art our refuge and strength O Theotokos, * the mighty help of all 
the world: * by thy supplications do thou protect thy servants from every 
want, ** O thou who alone art blessed 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VIII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Those who were bound by envy’s paralysis, * became weak with jealousy, * 
when they saw Jesus on the Sabbath strengthen the paralytic, * and they said: * 
“It is not proper to heal on the Sabbath. * Thou dost break the Sabbath rest of 
our fathers. * For they knew not that Thou art the Law’s Master, ** and the 
Healer of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th Psalm. 
For the Canons: The Canon of the Feast of the Paralytic with its Irmos to 
make eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. After 
the third Ode, the Sessional Hymns of the Paralytic and the Menaion. After the 
sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Paralytic, After the 9th Ode, the 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, the saint of the day, and the Paralytic. The Canon in 
Tone III: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Wondrous art Thou, O God, * Who gloriously workest wonders, * 
Who didst fashion the earth from the abyss, * and didst cover the chariots 
and save the people who sing to Thee * as our King and God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Working signs and doing wonders, O only King, Thou didst willingly endure 
the Cross, since Thou art compassionate; and having put death to death by 
death, Thou didst quicken us.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Let us dance for joy with faith today on the arising of Christ, O ye peoples. 
Hades hath been despoiled of them that he held in bonds, and he hastily 
surrendered them, as they praised the mighty deeds of God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Thou Who by divine might didst once heal the paralytic by Thy word, O 
Christ, and didst command him who had been ailing for many years to take up 
his bed, heal Thou my soul, which doth grievously ail.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Of old an angel came down to the Sheep’s Pool and healed one man each 
year; but now Christ doth cleanse endless multitudes by divine Baptism.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 6 ---
O leader of the angels and supreme Commander of the Ministers on high, 
do thou shelter and protect from all manner of temptations them that are 
gathered together in thine honored temple, praising God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: With the Bodiless ones, let us unceasingly praise the 
Beginningless God, Who is in three Hypostases and one Nature, even the 
Father, Word, and Spirit, Who hath a Kingdom and indivisible power.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Do thou save from dangers, conquest of barbarians, civil war 
and the sword, and every other danger, this thy flock, which doth ever faithfully 
honour thee, O pure one.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O ye people; 
* Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and from earth to 
heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: O barren and infertile soul, * bring forth a crop of glorious fruit 
and cry with joy: * I have been firmly established by Thee O God; * there 
is none holy and none righteous save Thee, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When of old the sun beheld Thee hanging upon the Tree, O Word, the light 
withdrew and all the earth was troubled; the dead arose when Thou didst 
repose, O almighty One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst go into the womb of the earth with Thy soul, Hades 
hastily gave forth the souls which it possessed, who cried unto Thy might a 
song of thanksgiving, O only Lord.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Do Thou, O supremely good One, heal my soul, which hath been ailing 
grievously for many years, as Thou didst once heal the paralytic, that I may walk 
in Thy way, which Thou dost show unto them that long for Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Together with the Hosts on high, O Archangel of God, make supplication 
for us who praise thee with faith, preserving and protecting us from falling into 
the passions of life.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Let us cry: Glory to the Father, the Son and the Spirit, for by 
nature God is one, Whom all the powers of the heavens glorify in fear, crying: 
Holy, Holy, Holy.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Seedless was thy conception, and transcending understanding 
was thy childbirth, O immaculate Virgin Mother; an awesome deed, an 
exceeding great wonder, honored by the angels and glorified by mortal men, O 
Lady and maiden.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
A word alone made strong the paralytic, * since it had been uttered by the 
universal Word, * Who had appeared upon the earth out of His love and 
compassion. * Wherefore, he departed hence and went forth bearing his own 
bed, * and the scribes, although they saw this great deed which was brought to 
pass, * since they were held by evil and palsied ** in soul by their envy, they 
endured not.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine 
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come 
forth from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely 
overshadowed. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Consumed by envy, the multitude of the Hebrews crucified Thee on the 
Tree, O Lord; and having annulled the condemnation of death, Thou didst arise 
as One mighty, raising up the world together with Thyself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Why seek ye with myrrh the inexhaustible Myrrh, O ye women? He is risen, 
said he that sat in white apparel, and He hath filled the world with spiritual 
fragrance.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Taking upon Thyself the likeness of a servant, out of the excess of Thy 
compassion didst Thou come and didst make whole him who had been 
bedridden for many years, O Word, commanding him to take up his bed.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
An angel of the Lord at a certain season came down and troubled the water 
in the Sheep’s Pool, making whole one person only. But Christ doth save 
endless multitudes by divine baptism.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O leader of the angels and guide of the erring, O supreme Commander of 
the Lord, come into our midst at this hour, and bear the prayers of us all unto 
the only Creator and Master.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: The Holy Trinity is united in nature, divided in Hypostases; 
being the super-essential Father, the co-eternal Son and the Holy and Only 
Almighty Spirit.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: How is it that thou dost suckle a babe, O pure one? How dost 
thou give birth to a child more ancient than Adam? How dost thou carry in 
thine arms a Son, Who is seated upon the shoulders of the cherubim? As He 
alone knoweth, as He understandeth, even He that hath given existence to all 
that is.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: By Thine unwaning light, O Christ, * do Thou illumine my 
humble soul * and guide it in Thy fear * for Thy commandments are 
light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree of the Cross, thereby raising the whole 
world together with Thyself; and becoming One among the dead, O God, Thou 
hast raised up them that were dead from all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Christ is risen, as He said, having emptied the realms of Hades, and He hath 
appeared unto the apostles, granting them everlasting joy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The angel was seen by the women to be as brilliant as lightning and as white 
as snow, saying: Weep not; our Life hath arisen and quickened them that were 
dead in the graves.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Even as Thou didst raise up the paralytic, O Christ, so also raise up my soul 
which is palsied by transgressions, and grant that I may fare well as I walk in 
Thine upright ways.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Michael, Leader of the angels, do thou save the people who are gathered 
today in thy temple, and who proclaim the mighty deeds of God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Of equal honour is the threefold Unity: Divided piously in 
hypostases, but united in nature is the Father, the Son and the divine Spirit.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy seedless childbearing, O pure one, and thine 
incomprehensible birthgiving do we praise, while blessing thee as the Mother of 
the Creator and Master of all.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, * the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss of the passions and a storm of adverse winds * have 
risen up against me. * But do Thou make haste, O Savior, * to save me, 
and deliver me from corruption, * as Thou didst deliver the prophet from 
the sea-monster. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Of Thine own will Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, and laid as one dead 
in the sepulcher, and having quickened together all those who were dead in 
Hades, O Christ, Thou didst raise them by Thy divine power.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Hades met Thee below, O compassionate One, it was embittered, 
and in haste it gave up those whom it held in bonds, who with unceasing voices 
praise Thine awesome Resurrection, O Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
On beholding Christ, the Life of all, arisen from the grave, the divine 
disciples worshipped Him with love, upright knowledge, and joyfulness of soul.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When he who laid for many years upon a bed of affliction was made whole 
by Thy command, O Christ, he glorified and praised Thy compassion, O Giver 
of life.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Michael, leader of the angels, as thou standest before the throne of the 
Master, be thou present in our midst, guiding toward the paths of life those 
who possess thee as a fervent protector.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Together with the awesome Hosts on high I reverence Thee, 
Who art a Trinity in Hypostases; I proclaim Thee, Who art a Unity in essence, 
O beginningless Father, Son and Upright Spirit, God of all things.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: He that sustaineth all things by His divine command is held in 
thine arms, O Virgin Theotokos, and since He is compassionate He doth rescue 
us from the enslaving hand of the evil one.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone III: 
As of old Thou didst raise up the paralytic, O Lord God, * by Thy divine 
care and might, raise up my soul which is palsied * by diverse sins and 
transgressions * and by unseemly deeds and acts, that, saved, I may also cry out: 
* O compassionate One, ** glory be to Thy dominion and might O Christ. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
 Ikos: O Thou Who holdest the ends of the earth in the palm of Thy hand, 
O Jesus our God, Who art co-beginningless with the Father, and Who, together 
with the Holy Spirit dost rule over all things: Thou didst appear in the flesh, 
healing infirmities, driving away passions, and giving sight to the blind. And, by 
a divine word, Thou didst raise up the paralytic, commanding him to walk 
straightway and to take up upon his shoulders his bed, which aforetime had 
borne him. Wherefore, together with him we all praise Thee and cry: O 
compassionate One, glory to Thy dominion and might O Christ. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the furnace * and save the children from its 
flames: * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord the God of our 
fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
On seeing Thee stretched out upon the Tree, the sun withdrew its light, not 
having the strength to shine upon the world when Thou, O King of all, wast 
setting, so that all the nations might be enlightened.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst arise, thereby emptying the tombs and despoiling Hades by 
Thine almighty power. Wherefore we praise Thine honored and divine arising, 
O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Why seek ye the Living as one dead? He is risen, He is not in the grave: 
Thus did the divine angel of old, who was like unto lightning, cry unto the 
myrrh-bearers.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having, by Thy word, made whole the paralytic who had been bedridden 
for many years, Thou didst cry aloud: Take up thy bed and walk, praising God’s 
mighty deeds.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Michael, supreme Commander of the Lord, by thy mediation do thou 
guide and shelter from all manner of evil those who are gathered in thy temple 
with faith unto the praise of God.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Trinitarion: O Trinity, since Thou art the God and Master of all, do Thou 
save from diverse perils us who praise Thee with faith, and make us partakers of 
Thy blessings.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: After ineffably bearing Him Who without change was begotten 
of the beginningless Father before all ages, thou didst remain a virgin; for this 
cause we bless thee, O pure one.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children from the furnace, * became 
man, suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth clothe 
mortality with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only blessed and 
most glorious * God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: God is unceasingly glorified on high by the angels, * O ye heaven 
of heavens, * ye earth and mountains, ye plains and abysses, * and all the 
race of mankind, * with hymns as to the Creator and Redeemer, * bless 
ye, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The veil was rent in twain when Thou wast crucified, O our Savior, and 
death gave up the dead which it had devoured; and Hades was stripped bare 
when it saw Thee coming into the nethermost regions of the earth.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy victory? Thou wast put 
to death and destroyed by the risen King. No longer dost thou reign; for the 
mighty One hath taken away those whom thou didst have in bondage.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Run quickly and proclaim the Resurrection unto the apostles, said the youth 
who appeared unto the myrrh-bearers. The Master is risen, and, in a marvelous 
manner, those dead from all ages have arisen together with Him.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having lain bedridden for many years, the paralytic cried: Have mercy on 
me, who am oppressed by need, O Redeemer. And He commandeth him to 
take up his bed in haste and walk upright.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 13 ---
As the Leader of the Immaterial Hosts, O supreme Commander, pray 
together with them that we be granted deliverance from our offences, 
correction of life, and the enjoyment of everlasting good things yonder.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: With one accord let us praise the uncreated, undivided Essence, 
the Godhead of three Hypostases, the beginningless God the Father, the Son 
and Holy Spirit, as we cry out the awesome melody of the seraphim.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Of old Isaiah beheld thee as a book, O Ever-virgin, wherein, by 
the finger of the Father, the timeless Word was inscribed, Who doth save from 
all irrationality us who praise thee with sacred words.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * 
wherein we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who 
didst conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet 
remained unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the 
hand of man, * and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed 
forth * from the root of David. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, O Jesus, thereby raising us up 
together with Thyself. And when of Thine own will Thou wast laid in the tomb, 
Thou didst raise from the tombs all the dead who praised Thine 
incomprehensible power and Thine invincible might.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst dawn forth from the grave as One most comely, like a 
bridegroom from a bridal chamber, O most comely Word; and Thou didst 
dispel the gloom of Hades, leading forth those who were in bonds, and who 
cried with one accord: Glory be to Thy glory, glory be to Thine arising, O Jesus 
our God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Bringing their tears and sighs mingled together with myrrh, the women 
came with haste unto Thine all-holy sepulcher. And through faith they were 
instructed concerning the glorious arising of Christ, which we celebrate, as we 
rejoice in gladness of soul.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Bodily health followed Thy command, O Christ, and the former paralytic 
was seen walking with haste and bearing his bed whereon he had lain for many 
years, and he praised Thy great might.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Pray for our enlightenment, O great supreme Commander, who dost ever 
stand in the presence of the great Light, that our life may be peaceful, for it is 
ever troubled by the assaults of the serpent and by the circumstances of life, O 
right glorious one.  
Refrain: Most Holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Most reverently do I glorify Thee, O Light and Lights, O Life 
and Lives, O Father, Word and Holy Spirit, tri-hypostatic Unity, indivisible 
Dominion, uncommingled Godhead; and together with the Hosts on high, I cry 
out: Holy, Holy, Holy.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Christ, the great Sun, came forth from thy light-bearing womb, 
and with brilliant rays enlightened the world, O immaculate one, and dispelled 
the darkness of our transgressions. Wherefore, we praise thee, since thou art the 
cause of all good things, O Bride of God.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on the 
third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, * Salvation of the world! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Feast  
The Lover of mankind, the all-compassionate Lord, drew nigh and stood at 
the Sheep’s Pool that He might heal men’s diseases; and there He found a man 
who had lain bed-ridden, and enfeebled for many years. And He cried aloud 
unto him, saying: Take up thy bed now, and go forth; walk in the upright and 
straight paths.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone III: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Thy guards recounted all the marvels, O Lord, * but, by filling their right 
hands with money, * the Sanhedrin of folly thought to conceal Thy 
Resurrection, * which the world glorifies; ** have mercy upon us. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Thy guards recounted all the marvels, O Lord ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
A Hymn of Compunction: Gather my scattered mind, O Lord, and purify 
my hardened heart. * Grant me repentance, as Thou didst to Peter; * and 
heartfelt sighing, as Thou didst grant to the publican; * and tears, as to the 
harlot, * that with a great voice I may cry unto Thee: ** O God, save me, since 
Thou alone art compassionate and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Martyricon: The soldiers of Christ disdained the fear of kings and tyrants, * 
and boldly and courageously confessed Him as the Lord of all, * our God and 
King, ** and they unceasingly intercede on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VIII: 
O Lord, not the pool, but Thy word * healed and renewed the paralytic; * 
nor was he hindered by his infirmity of many years; * for the might of Thy 
voice proved to be more effective. * And he cast off his heavy burden * and 
carried the weight of his bed as a testimony to the abundance of Thy 
compassions. ** Glory be to Thee.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III: 
The strength of Thy life-creating Word * hath been made manifest to the 
Paralytic, * a vivifying and life creating word, of which he bore witness, * for he 
who was weak and palsied, * attained to the unhoped-for taking-up of his bed, 
** having for many long years been laid thereon.  
Verse: Of Thy mercies, O Lord, will I sing for ever. * Unto generation 
and generation will I declare Thy truth with my mouth. 
With joy, the paralytic fulfilleth the command * of Thine almighty sovereign 
power; * taking up his bed and carrying it, * he beareth witness crying aloud: ** 
He that hath healed me hath commanded me to do this. 
Verse: For Thou hast said: Mercy shall be built up for ever. * In the 
heavens shall Thy truth be established. 
He who had lain bedridden, enfeebled, and paralyzed for many years, * cried 
aloud unto the Redeemer: * “Have mercy upon me, I am weak and bound fast 
with destitution.” * Whereupon the Savior bid him ** to take up his bed and 
bear it. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone : 
At the Sheep’s Pool a man lay there infirm; * and upon seeing Thee, O 
Lord, he cried: * I have no man, that, when the water is troubled, * he might lift 
me and place me therein. * But when I go, another goeth before me * and 
receiveth healing, * and straightway, the Savior had compassion upon him, * 
saying unto him: * For thee I became a man, * for thee I have been clothed in 
flesh, * and sayest thou: I have no man? * Take up thy bed and walk. * All 
things are possible for Thee, * all things are obedient to Thee, * all things are 
subject to Thee. * Remember us all and have mercy on us, O Holy One, ** 
since Thou lovest mankind. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Without seed didst thou conceive by the Holy Spirit; * and glorifying thee, 
we hymn thee: ** Rejoice, most holy Virgin!  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let the heavens ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
TUESDAY OF THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IV of the Canon. 
Consumed by envy, the multitude of the Hebrews crucified Thee on the 
Tree, O Lord; and having annulled the condemnation of death, Thou didst arise 
as One mighty, raising up the world together with Thyself.  
Why seek ye with myrrh the inexhaustible Myrrh, O ye women? He is risen, 
said he that sat in white apparel, and He hath filled the world with spiritual 
fragrance.  
Taking upon Thyself the likeness of a servant, out of the excess of Thy 
compassion didst Thou come and didst make whole him that had been 
bedridden for many years, O Word, when Thou didst command him to take up 
his bed.  
An angel of the Lord at a certain season came down and troubled the water 
in the Sheep’s Pool, making whole one person only. But Christ doth save 
endless multitudes by divine baptism.  
United in nature, divided in Hypostases, is the Holy Trinity; even the super-
essential Father, the co-eternal Son and the Holy and Only Almighty Spirit.  
Theotokion: How is it that thou dost suckle a babe, O pure one? How dost 
thou give birth to a child more ancient than Adam? How dost thou carry in 
thine arms a Son, Who is seated upon the shoulders of the cherubim? As He 
alone knoweth, as He understandeth, even He that hath given existence to all 
things.  
At the Entrance The Troparion for the Feast, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, if there be 
any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone III: 
As of old Thou didst raise up the paralytic, O Lord God, * by Thy divine 
care and might, raise up my soul which is palsied * by diverse sins and 
transgressions * and by unseemly deeds and acts, that, saved, I may also cry out: 
* O Compassionate Redeemer, O Christ, ** glory to Thy dominion and might. 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon: Great is our Lord, and great is His strength, * and of His 
understanding there is no measure. 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our God. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 10:21 - 33) 
In those days, Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from 
Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore 
ye are come? And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that 
feareth God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned 
from God by an holy angel to send for thee into his house, and to hear words 
of thee. Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morrow Peter 
went away with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him. And 
the morrow after they entered into Caesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, 
and he had called together his kinsmen and near friends. And as Peter was 
coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him. 
But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a man. And as he 
talked with him, he went in, and found many that were come together. And he 
said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew 
to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath shewed 
me that I should not call any man common or unclean. Therefore came I unto 
you without gainsaying, as soon as I was sent for: I ask therefore for what intent 
ye have sent for me? And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this 
hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and, behold, a man stood 
before me in bright clothing, And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine 
alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God. Send therefore to Joppa, and 
call hither Simon, whose surname is Peter; he is lodged in the house of one 
Simon a tanner by the sea side: who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee. 
Immediately therefore I sent to thee; and thou hast well done that thou art 
come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that 
are commanded thee of God. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (7:1 - 13) 
At that time: Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Jewry, 
because the Jews sought to kill him. Now the Jew’s feast of tabernacles was at 
hand. His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea, 
that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. For there is no man 
that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If 
thou do these things, shew thyself to the world. For neither did his brethren 
believe in him. Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your 
time is alway ready. The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I 
testify of it, that the works thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up 
yet unto this feast: for my time is not yet full come. When he had said these 
words unto them, he abode still in Galilee. But when his brethren were gone up, 
then went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. Then 
the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he? And there was much 
murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said, He is a good 
man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people. Howbeit no man spake 
openly of him for fear of the Jews. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
The Communion Hymn:  
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality.  
Verse: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the highest. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
