--- PAGE 1 ---
MID-PENTECOST 
TUESDAY EVENING IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 9th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, all from the Pentecostarion, Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having ascended the Cross O Lord ...”: 
There is come now the middle of those days * which commence with the 
saving arising * and which are sealed by the sacred Pentecost. * Illumined by 
both feasts and joining both, * we come to render glory and honor beforehand 
** to the regal Ascension. (Twice) 
Sion heard and rejoiced when it received the glad tidings * of Christ’s 
Resurrection, * and all of her faithful offspring greatly rejoice upon beholding 
Him, * Who by the grace of the Spirit * doth wash away the stain of the murder 
of the Christ, * preparing to solemnly celebrate ** the joyous Mid-festival of 
both feasts. (Twice) 
The bountiful pouring forth of the Spirit upon all, * is now at hand as the 
Scripture saith. * This is proclaimed by the mid-point of the blessed season * 
after Christ’s death, burial and arising, * when He gave unto His disciples * His 
unfailing and true promise, ** which revealed most clearly the coming of the 
Comforter. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Having come together at the Mid-feast * between Thy Resurrection and the 
divine coming of Thy Holy Spirit, O Christ, * we praise the mysteries of Thy 
wonders. ** Wherefore, on this day do Thou send down Thy great mercy unto 
us. 
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my 
life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Then immediately the Scriptural Lessons: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF MICHAIAS. 
Thus saith the Lord: The law shall go forth out of Sion, and the Word of 
the Lord from Jerusalem. And He shall judge among many people, and rebuke 
strong nations that are in a land afar off. For all people will walk every one his 
way, but we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever. Thus saith the 
Lord Almighty: Hear, O ye mountains, and ye vales, the foundations of the 
earth; for the Lord hath a controversy with His people, and He will reason with 
Israel, saying: O My people, what have I done unto thee? or wherein have I 
grieved thee? or wherein have I wearied thee? Answer Me. For I brought thee 
up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of bondage; 
and I sent before thy face Moses and Aaron. O My people, what counsel did 
thine enemies take against thee? Hath it not been told thee, O man, what is 
good? And what doth the Lord require of thee, but to execute judgment, and to 
love mercy, and to ready thyself to walk with the Lord thy God? Because the 
Lord shall be magnified in strength, and shall shepherd His flock in peace, unto 
the uttermost parts of the earth. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH. 
Thus saith the Lord: Ye that thirst, go to the water, and all that have no 
money, go and buy; and eat and drink wine and fat without money or price. For 
thus saith the Lord Almighty: O My people, draw ye water with joy out of the 
well-springs of salvation. And in that day thou shalt say: Praise the Lord, call 
aloud upon His Name, proclaim among the nations His glory; remember that 
His Name is exalted. O My people, hearken to Me, and ye shall eat that which is 
good, and your soul shall feast itself on good things. Give heed with your ears, 
and follow My ways; hearken to Me, and your soul shall live amid good things; 
and I will make with you an everlasting covenant, and ye shall call upon Me. 
And when he shall draw nigh to Me, let the ungodly leave his ways and the 
lawless man his counsels; and let him return to Me, and I shall have mercy on 
you, and I shall pardon your sins. For My counsels are not as your counsels, 
saith the Lord. But as the heaven is distant from the earth, so is My way distant 
from your ways, and your thoughts from My mind. For as rain shall come 
down, or snow, from heaven, and shall not return until it have saturated the 
earth, and it bring forth, and bud, and have given seed to the sower, and bread 
for food: so shall My word be, whatever shall proceed out of My mouth, it shall 
by no means turn back void, until all the things which I willed shall have been 
accomplished; and I will make My ways and My commandments to prosper. 
For ye shall go forth with joy, and shall be taught with gladness; For the 
mountains and the hills shall exult to welcome you with joy, and all the trees of 
the field shall clap with their branches. And instead of the bramble shall come 

--- PAGE 3 ---
up the cypress, and instead of the nettle shall come up the myrtle; and the Lord 
shall be for a Name, and for an everlasting sign, saith the Lord God, the Holy 
One of Israel. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS. 
Wisdom hath builded herself a house, and hath established seven pillars. She 
hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also prepared her 
table. She hath sent forth her servants, making invitation to the feast with a loud 
proclamation, and saying: Whosoever is foolish, let him turn aside to me; as for 
them that want understanding, she saith: Come, eat of my bread and drink of 
the wine which I have mingled for you. Forsake foolishness, and ye shall live, 
and go in search of understanding that ye may live, and achieve understanding 
in knowledge. He that reproveth evil men getteth to himself shame; and he that 
rebuketh a wicked man shall himself be blamed, for rebukes unto the wicked 
are as wounds to him. Reprove not evil men, lest they hate thee; rebuke a wise 
man, and he will love thee. Give occasion to a wise man, and he will become yet 
wiser; teach a just man, and he will receive more learning. The fear of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of Saints is understanding. For to 
know the Law is the property of a good mind, for in this wise thou shalt live 
long, and years of life shall be added to thee. 
The Litany: Let us say with our whole heart ..., 
Vouchsafe O Lord ..., 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, by John the monk, in Tone I: 
The mid-point of the days of Pentecost hath come. * Wherein Christ 
disclosed His divine might in part, * in that He strengthened the paralytic * and 
by a word raised him up from his bed. * In a God-befitting manner He wrought 
miracles in a body of clay, ** and hath granted unto mankind everlasting life 
and great mercy. 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, * which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning.  
Thou, the Wisdom of God, * didst come unto the temple at Mid-feast, * 
teaching and reproving the disobedient Jews, * the Pharisees, and Scribes, * and 
with boldness didst Thou cry unto them: * He that thirsteth, let him come unto 
Me and drink living water, * and he shall never again thirst unto eternity. * 
From him that believeth in My goodness, * rivers of eternal life shall pour forth 
from his noetic belly. * O how great is Thy goodness and compassion, ** O 
Christ our God! Glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Tone II: 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 
When the Mid-feast had come, * Jesus went up into the temple and taught 
the disobedient Jews, saying: * He that thirsteth, let him come unto Me and 
drink living and everlasting water, * and he shall never again thirst unto eternity. 
* He that believeth in Me, rivers shall flow from his noetic belly, ** and he shall 
have the light of life.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
When Thou wast teaching at Mid-feast, O Savior, * the Jews spake saying: * 
How knoweth this man letters, having never learned? * For they knew not that 
Thou art the Wisdom * that fashioned the world. ** Glory be to Thee. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
MID-PENTECOST: WEDNESDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. X) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
The Lord, Who perceiveth the hidden thoughts of all hearts, * while 
standing within the temple cried aloud * declaring the truth unto those who had 
lied: * Why do ye seek to apprehend Me, the Life-giver? * Thus with boldness 
did He cry at Mid-feast. ** “Judge not by appearance, but judge rightly, ye 
lawless ones.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XI) Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
On the day of the Mid-feast of Pentecost, * the Lord of all stood in the 
temple, * and spake with boldness to the Hebrews, * openly censuring them as 
their King and God, * with a just rebuke of their presumptuousness. * But in 
His boundless compassion, ** He hath bestowed His great mercy upon us all.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...” and the 50th Psalm. 
 Then the following Canons, the first in Fourth Tone, and the second in 
Eighth Tone, to make fourteen in each Ode, including the Irmos. The Canon in 
Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of 
old, * and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * 
the power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The great benefactions and gifts, the graces and divine illuminations of 
Thine incomprehensible and divine Incarnation, do Thou abundantly pour 
forth and shine upon us, O Master.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
At Mid-feast Thou hast come, O Christ, manifestly sending forth the radiant 
flashes of Thy Godhead; for Thou art the joyous Festival of the saved and the 
Cause of our salvation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art become wisdom, righteousness from God, and redemption for us, 
O Lord. Thou dost convey us from earth to the height of heaven, and dost 
grant us the divine Spirit. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy flesh knew not corruption in the sepulcher, O Master. 
Rather, inasmuch as it was formed without seed, it received not corruption, for 
in a transcendent manner it was not subject to the order of nature. 
The Second Canon, in Tone VIII: 
A Composition of Andrew of Crete 
Irmos: Thou didst make the sea a wall ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Clap your hands, O ye nations; lament, O ye Hebrews. For Christ, the Giver 
of Life, hath broken asunder the bonds of Hades, and hath raised up the dead 
and healed sicknesses by a word. This is our God, Who granteth life unto them 
that believe in His Name. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst show a wonder by changing the water into wine, O Master, Who 
didst change the rivers of Egypt into blood. Thou didst also raise up the dead, 
accomplishing this sign in these latter times. Glory be to Thine ineffable 
counsel, O Savior; glory be to Thy self-abasement, whereby Thou hast renewed 
us. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art an ever-flowing stream of true life, O Lord; Thou art our 
Resurrection. Willingly didst Thou become weary, O my Savior, and willingly 
didst Thou thirst, submitting to the laws of nature. And when Thou camest to 
Sichar in the flesh, Thou didst ask the Samaritan woman for water, that Thou 
mightest drink. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst bless the loaves and multiply the fish, O incomprehensible God; 
Thou didst fill the people bounteously and didst promise an ever-flowing spring 
of wisdom to them that thirst. Thou art our God, O Savior, Who givest life 
unto them that believe in Thy Name. 
Glory ..., I glorify the Three Who are co-beginningless and of equal 
sovereignty: the Father, Who is beginningless God; the Son, Who is co-
beginningless; and the Spirit, Who is co-eternal with the Son; one essence in 
three Hypostases. I praise and honor one supreme sovereign Principle of the 
beginningless Godhead and Essence. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou alone didst contain within thy womb the 
Creator, O Birthgiver of God, ineffably conceiving Him in the flesh yet 
remaining a Virgin, while thy virginity in no wise suffered harm. Do thou ever 
entreat Him unceasingly on behalf of thy flock, since He is thy Son and God. 
Katavasia: Thou didst make the sea a wall; * Thou didst overwhelm 
boastful Pharaoh in the deep * together with his chariots. * Thou didst 
save the people dry-shod, O Lord, * and didst lead them forth to a 
mountain of sanctification, as they cried: * We shall sing a song of victory 
to Thee, our God, * for Thou hast been glorified. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O 
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst open unto the Church the springs of life-creating waters, O 
good One, and didst cry: If any zealous man thirst, let him come and drink. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst say plainly that Thou wouldst be lifted up from earth unto 
heaven, and Thou didst promise to send the Holy Spirit from thence. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The Lord, Who by nature is life-creating and Who was born of 
a Virgin, hath granted incorruption unto all the faithful, since He is 
compassionate. 
The Second Canon 
Irmos: My heart is established ..., 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Do not judge a judgment according to appearance, O ye Jews; thus, as it is 
written, said the Master when He came unto the temple and taught at the Judaic 
Mid-feast. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Do not judge a judgment according to appearance, O ye Jews, for Christ is 
come. The prophets named Him: He that cometh from Sion and hath restored 
the world. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Even though ye believe not His Words, O ye Jews, be convinced by the 
works of the Master. Why do ye deceive yourselves and disregard the Holy One, 
of Whom Moses wrote in the Law? 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
If the Messiah must assuredly come, O ye Jews, then the Messiah hath now 
come, Who is Christ. Why do ye deceive yourselves and disregard the Righteous 
One, of Whom Moses wrote in the Law? 
Glory ..., We worship Thee, O Father, Who art beginningless in Thine 
essence, and we piously praise Thy beginningless Son and the all-holy Spirit, O 
ye Three Who are by nature one God. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Though Thou art one of the Trinity, Thou didst 
assume flesh, neither undergoing change in Thine essence nor burning the 
uncorrupted womb of her that gave birth to Thee, O Lord, Who art wholly 
God and Fire. 
Katavasia: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my 
God, * my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in 
Thy salvation. 
Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast Thou didst stand in the temple’s court * in a god-befitting 
manner * and didst cry aloud: * Let him who doth suffer thirst now draw nigh 
unto Me and drink. * He that drinketh of the sacred water that I shall give, * 
from within shall the springs of My teachings issue forth. * Whosoever doth 
believe that the divine Father hath sent Me, * and that I came forth from Him, 
* with Me he shall be glorified. * Therefore we cry unto Thee: * Glory be to 
Thee, O Christ God, * Who dost cause the streams of Thy great love for 
mankind, * to abundantly well forth unto us, Thy servants. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou, O Savior, dost pour out for all the world living waters * of wisdom 
and endless life, * inviting all to partake and to drink thereof; * for he who 
receiveth and keepeth Thy holy law * doth thereby quench the coals of 
deception. * Wherefore, he shall not thirst throughout the ages, * nor fail to be 
filled with Thee, O Master King of heaven. * For this cause we glorify Thy 
power, O Christ God, * asking that the forgiveness of sins ** be abundantly 
granted unto us, Thy servants. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having shattered the gates of death by Thy might, Thou hast made known 
the ways of life; and Thou didst open the gates of immortality unto them that 
cry with faith: Glory be to Thy power, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since Thou Who art beginningless dost have in the grasp of Thy hand the 
beginning of all things, and dost hold fast their middle and final end as well, 
Thou didst stand in the midst and cry aloud: Come, O ye of godly mind; enjoy 
the divine gifts. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since Thou as God hast authority over all things, and as one mighty didst 
destroy the dominion of death, O Christ, Thou didst promise to send the Holy 
Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Mother who knewest not wedlock, thou dost 
bestow grace abundantly upon those who praise thee; and from the Word Who 
is before the ages and Who was born from thee, thou dost entreat for the 
forgiveness of their offences. 
The Second Canon: 
Irmos: With noetic eyes the prophet Habbakuk ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
If the Messiah must come, then Christ is the Messiah, O ye lawless ones; 
Why do ye not believe in Him? Behold, He is come, and the things He doeth 
bear witness to Him: He made the water into wine and strengthened the 
paralytic by a word. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since ye do not understand the Scriptures, ye are all deceived, O ye lawless 
Hebrews; for Christ is truly come and hath enlightened all mankind, showing 
forth many signs and wonders among you. In vain do ye deny Him Who is the 
true Life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Christ cried unto the Jews: One work have I shown unto you, and already ye 
marvel. Ye circumcise a man even on the Sabbath, He saith; Why then do ye 
accuse Me, Who have raised up a paralytic by a word? 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
I have done many works; for which work, then, do ye stone Me? cried 
Christ unto the Jews, reproaching them. For by a word I have made a man 
completely whole; judge not according to appearance, O ye men. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou Who workest through the apostles and Who, together with the Spirit, 
dost Thyself rest in the prophets, O Christ, Thou immaculate Offspring of the 
Father’s nature, Thou didst lead the nations up unto knowledge of Thee 
through Thy signs. 
Glory ..., O Trinity, undivided Unity; beginningless Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit; Thou Trinity in Unity; O life-creating, uncreated God, equal in honor 
and in rank: Save those who praise Thee, and deliver them from dangers and 
afflictions. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Bride of God and pure Virgin Mother, who 
didst contain God in thy womb while He yet remained uncircumscribed: Cease 
not to intercede on our behalf, that through thee we may be delivered from 
adversities, for unto thee do we ever flee for refuge. 
Katavasia: With noetic eyes the prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy 
coming, O Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * “God shall come out of 
Theman!” Glory to Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy 
Light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy 
praises in faith. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having reached the middle of the divine feasts, let us be godly-wise and 
zealously adorn ourselves with the perfection of divine virtue. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
How truly sacred is this present feast; for it marketh the mid-point of the 
great feasts and doth shine forth from both. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The mind of the Archangel is not able to comprehend Thine 
ineffable and most pure birthgiving from a Virgin, O my greatly merciful Savior. 
The Second Canon 
Irmos: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having adorned Thine apostles with miracles and magnified Thy disciples 
with wonders throughout the World, Thou hast glorified them and bestowed 
upon them Thy Kingdom, O our Savior. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The disciples have enlightened all the ends of the earth with miracles and 
teachings, and in diverse ways they preached the word of Thy Kingdom, O 
Christ Savior. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
We send up praise unto Thy Kingdom, and we offer a hymn unto Thee 
Who didst appear on earth for our sake and didst enlighten the World and 
restore Adam. 
Glory ..., Glory be to Thee, O holy Father, unbegotten God. Glory be to 
Thee, O timeless, only-begotten Word. Glory be to Thee, O divine Spirit, of 
one throne and of one essence with the Father and the Son. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thy womb is become a holy table which holdeth 
the heavenly Bread, whereof he that eateth dieth not, as the Nourisher of all 
hath said, O Birthgiver of God. 
Katavasia: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace upon us; * O Lord our 
God, take us for Thy possession; * O Lord, besides Thee we know none 
other: * and we call upon Thy Name. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * “I will sacrifice unto 
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the 
demons’ * by the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
The mid-point of Pentecost hath come this day. By the former feast it is 
illumined with the most divine radiance of the divine Pascha, and by the latter 
feast it is made to shine with the grace of the Comforter. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
While standing in the temple, O Christ, Thou didst speak unto the 
assemblies of the Jews and didst reveal Thine own glory, thereby manifesting 
Thy consubstantiality with the Father. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Be thou my protection and mine unshaken rampart, O only 
Mother of God. Redeem me from the stumbling-blocks of the world, and 
illumine me by thy divine effulgence. 
The Second Canon 
Irmos: The billows of life trouble me ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Jesus, Who takest care for all the ends of the earth, Thou didst go up to 
the temple at Mid-feast, as John hath said, and taught the multitudes the Word 
of truth. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst open Thy lips, O Master, and didst preach to the world the most 
pure Father and the all-holy Spirit, preserving Thy kinship with both even after 
Thine Incarnation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst accomplish the work of the Father and didst confirm Thy words 
by Thy deeds, for Thou didst perform healings and signs, O Savior, raising the 
paralytic, cleansing lepers, and resurrecting the dead. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The beginningless Son received a beginning and became a man, taking upon 
Himself that which is proper to our nature. And at Mid-feast He taught and 
said: Hasten ye unto the ever-flowing Spring, that ye may draw forth life. 
Glory ..., We all glorify the one Godhead in Trinity, the uncreated and 
undivided essence in three Hypostases, even the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, Who while being Three are One. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: We praise thee who didst remain a virgin after 
giving birth; thee alone do we glorify as both Virgin and Mother, O pure 

--- PAGE 13 ---
maiden, Bride of God; for from thee God truly became incarnate and thus 
Quickened us. 
Katavasia: The billows of life trouble me like the waters of the sea, * O 
Lover of Mankind. * Wherefore, like Jonah I cry unto Thee, O Word: * 
Raise up my life from corruption, O compassionate Lord. 
Kontakion, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
Ikos: With the streams of Thy Blood do Thou Water my soul, which is 
grown dry and barren because of mine iniquities and offences, and show it forth 
to be fruitful in virtues. For Thou didst tell all to draw nigh Thee, O all-holy 
Word of God, and to draw forth the water of incorruption, which is living and 
which washeth away the sins of those who praise Thy glorious and divine 
arising. Unto them that know Thee as God, O good One, grant from on high 
the strength of the Spirit, which verily was borne by Thy disciples, for Thou art 
truly the Well-spring of life for all. 
SYNAXARION READING 
On the Wednesday of the Paralytic, we celebrate the Feast of Mid-Pentecost. 
Verse: Standing in the midst of the teachers, Christ the Messiah teacheth 
at Mid-feast. 
Verse: By Thy boundless mercy, O Christ our God, have mercy on us. 
Amen. 
After the Savior had miraculously healed the paralytic, the Jews, especially 
the Pharisees and Scribes, were moved with envy and persecuted Him, and 
sought to slay Him, using the excuse that He did not keep the Sabbath, since 
He worked miracles on that day. Jesus then departed to Galilee. About the 
middle of the Feast of Tabernacles, He went up again to the Temple and taught. 
The Jews, marveling at the wisdom of His words, said, “How knoweth this man 
letters, having never learned?” But Christ first reproached their unbelief and 
lawlessness, then proved to them by the Law that they sought to slay Him 
unjustly, supposedly as a despiser of the Law, since He had healed the paralytic 
on the Sabbath. Therefore, since the things spoken by Christ in the middle of 
the Feast of Tabernacles are related to the Sunday of the Paralytic that is just 

--- PAGE 14 ---
passed, and since we have already reached the midpoint of the fifty days 
between Pascha and Pentecost, the Church has appointed this present feast as a 
bond between the two great feasts, thereby uniting, as it were, the two into one, 
and partaking of the grace of them both. Therefore today’s feast is called Mid-
Pentecost, and the Gospel Reading, “At Mid-feast” - though it refers to the 
Feast of Tabernacles - is used. It should be noted that there were three great 
Jewish feasts: the Passover, Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles. Passover 
was celebrated on the 15th of Nisan, the first month of the Jewish calendar, 
which coincides roughly with our March. This feast commemorated that day on 
which the Hebrews were commanded to eat the lamb in the evening and anoint 
the doors of their houses with its blood. Then, having escaped bondage and 
death at the hands of the Egyptians, they passed through the Red Sea to come 
to the Promised Land. It is also called “The Feast of Unleavened Bread,” 
because they ate unleavened bread for seven days. Pentecost was celebrated fifty 
days after the Passover, first of all, because the Hebrew tribes had reached 
Mount Sinai after leaving Egypt, and there received the Law from God; 
secondly, it was celebrated to commemorate their entry into the Promised Land, 
where also they ate bread, after having been fed with manna forty years in the 
desert. Therefore, on this day they offered to God a sacrifice of bread prepared 
with new wheat. Finally, they also celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles from the 
15th to the 22nd of “the seventh month,” which corresponds roughly to our 
September. During this time, they live in booths made of branches in 
commemoration of the forty years they spent in the desert, living in tabernacles, 
that is, tents (Exodus 12:10-20; Leviticus 23). 
By Thy boundless mercy O Christ our God,  
Have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having dispelled the power of death by Thy might, O Savior, Thou hast 
made known unto all mankind the path of life. With thankfulness they cry to 
Thee: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Beholding Thee bearing flesh, the assemblies of the Hebrew people did not 
recognize Thee, O Word of God; but we sing to Thee: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice O sanctified and divine tabernacle of the Most High; 
for through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been granted to those who cry: 
Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Lady. 
The Second Canon: 
Irmos: The Chaldean furnace, burning with fire ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou Who art rest for all didst grow weary in the flesh; Thou Who art the 
well-spring of miracles didst willingly thirst. Thou didst seek after water, O 
Jesus, promising living water. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst converse with a Samaritan woman, O Lord, thereby reproving 
the mindlessness of the lawless Hebrews, insofar as she believed Thee to be the 
Son of God, and they denied Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Savior, Thou ever-living well-spring, Thou didst promise to grant living 
water which springeth forth, the water of immortality, unto those who with 
faith receive Thy Spirit, which proceedeth from the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
With five loaves Thou didst feed the thousands that hungered, and made the 
child’s morsels to be more than enough for yet another multitude, O Savior. 
Thus showing Thy glory unto Thy sacred disciples. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
He that eateth Thy Bread shall live forever, and he that drinketh Thy Blood 
abideth in Thee, my Savior, and Thou abidest in him, and Thou shalt raise him 
up at the last day.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou madest Thy dispensation wondrous, O Master, confirming by 
miracles Thy divine authority. Thou didst drive out illnesses, raise up the dead, 
and enlighten the blind, since Thou art God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou didst cleanse the lepers and restore the lame; Thou didst strengthen 
the paralytics and heal the blood-streaming woman, and didst walk upon the 
sea. Thus showing Thy glory unto Thy sacred disciples. 
Glory ..., We worship Thy timeless Father and the grace of the Spirit, which 
Thou as God didst apportion unto Thine apostles, sending them forth to 
preach, O Lord. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou didst contain within thy womb the 
uncontainable Word, thou didst suckle at thy breasts Him that nourisheth the 
world and didst hold in thine arms our Sustainer, O pure Birthgiver of God. 
Katavasia: The Chaldean furnace, burning with fire, * was bedewed by 
the Spirit * through the presence of God; * and the children chanted: * O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having arisen from the grave as one comely, and adorned with the glory of 
the Godhead, O Lord, Thou didst appear unto Thine apostles and didst 
promise to send the power of the Spirit unto those who cry aloud: Bless ye the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
In a manner befitting Thee, since Thou as God art the supreme Author of 
life, Thou didst slay Hades and didst well forth eternal life unto all, wherefore 
the graces of these radiant days now constitute a most clear image of the 
everlasting life of those who cry: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst cause rays of righteousness to shine upon the world like the sun, 
O Christ, in that Thou didst send Thine apostles unto the world. Bearing Thee, 
the incomprehensible Light, they drove away the darkness of ignorance, and 
cried: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Behold now, a prince and ruler hath manifestly come from the 
tribe of Judah, for thou, O all-immaculate one, hast given birth to Him Who is 
the Expectation of the nations which were set aside for Him aforetime. Yea, 
thou hast borne Christ, to Whom we chant: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
The Second Canon 
Irmos: O ye angels and ye powers of heaven ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Come, O ye peoples, and behold Him Who is praised upon a throne of 
glory, being blasphemed by lawless people. And as ye behold Him, praise Him 
as the Messiah, Who was foretold by the prophets. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art truly the Christ, Who hast come into the world. With Thee there is 
salvation and the remission of the failings of our fathers; Thou art indeed the 
Life of those who have come to believe in Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
As it is written, the Wisdom of God came into the temple at Mid-feast and 
taught that He is truly Christ the Messiah, from Whom there cometh salvation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
On the Sabbaths and on all days Christ wrought manifest signs, healing 
those in diverse illnesses. But the deceitful people were consumed with malice 
and wrath. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The Jews bitterly reviled Christ and said: On the Sabbath did this Man hath 
healed the paralytic who had lain sick for many years, therefore He hath 
transgressed the Law. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Christ said to the Jews: Did not Moses in giving you the Law command that 
ye be circumcised? Yet ye circumcise on the Sabbath, lest the Law of your 
fathers be broken. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
They that were wholly ungrateful and who of old had sojourned in the 
wilderness, out of malice cast blasphemies at their Benefactor. They wagged 
their unjust tongues while they meditated vain things. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord 
Trinitarion: Of a truth, the Trinity is one God, without the Father leaving 
that which is proper to Himself and assuming Sonship, nor with the Son 
transforming His attributes into procession. But I glorify the Three apart and 
together, as Light and God, throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Tell us, O Theotokos: How didst thou give birth 
unto Him Who hath shone forth timelessly from the Father and Who is praised 
together with the Holy Spirit? - except in a manner known only to Him Who 
was well-pleased to be born from thee. 
Katavasia: Seated upon the throne of glory, * and unceasingly glorified as 
God, * O ye angels and heavens bless, ** hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!. 
(The Magnificat is not chanted) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since we have learned from Christ a new and unprecedented way of life, let 
us all be especially diligent to preserve it until the end, that We may enjoy the 
presence of the Holy Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Life-Giving Savior, Thou didst clothe my mortal nature with the garment 
of immortality and the grace of incorruption, and didst raise it up together with 
Thyself. Thou didst lead it unto the Father, having dispelled my warfare of 
many years. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since we have been restored again to the life of heaven by virtue of the 
mediation of Him Who emptied Himself even so far as to assume the form of a 
servant and hath exalted us, let us magnify Him as is meet. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: All we the faithful have put our trust in thee, and we acclaim 
thee with songs of praise as the root, source, and cause of incorruption, O 
Virgin, for thou didst well forth for us the Hypostatic Immortality. 
The Second Canon: 
Irmos: Virginity is alien to motherhood ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
At the Judaic Mid-feast, O my Savior, Thou didst go up to Thy temple and 
didst teach all. And the Jews marveled and said: Whence knoweth this Man 
letters, having never learned? 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
My Redeemer performed wonders and signs, welling forth gifts of healings. 
He drove away illnesses and healed the ailing, but the Jews raged with frenzy at 
the multitude of His miracles. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
My Redeemer cried out as He reproached the disobedient Jews: Judge not 
according to appearance, but judge ye a righteous judgment. For the Law also 
commandeth that every man be circumcised, even if it be on the Sabbath. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
As Thou didst promise, O Savior, Thou didst grant the greater miracles unto 
Thy disciples when Thou didst send them to preach Thy glory unto the nations. 
And they proclaimed unto the world Thy grace and Resurrection and 
Incarnation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Christ said unto the Jews: If ye circumcise a man on the Sabbath that the 
Law might not be broken, why are ye now angry with Me, in that by a word I 
have made a man completely whole? Ye judge according to the flesh. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Word, Who didst heal the withered hand by a word, do Thou heal the 
earth of my heart, which hath long ago become parched, and show me forth as 
one fruitful, that I also might bring forth fruit in fervent repentance, O Savior. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
I lie upon my bed of pain, O Word. Make me to stand aright by cleansing 
my leprous heart and enlightening the eyes of my soul, even as Thou didst raise 
up the paralytic who lay upon his bed. 
Glory ..., It is alien to the lawless to reverence the beginningless Trinity, 
even the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the uncreated Omnipotence, 
through Whom the whole world was established by the might of His power. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou, O Virgin Mother, didst contain in thy 
womb Christ, the Giver of life, Who is One of the Trinity; Whom all creation 
praiseth and before Whom the thrones on high tremble. Do thou beseech Him, 
O all-blessed one, that our souls be saved. 
Katavasia: Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing 
strange to virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * 
Therefore we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee 
blessed. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
O Thou that hast the never-emptying wine-bowl of gifts, * grant that I may 
draw water unto remission of my sins. * For with great thirst am I taken, ** O 
Thou only lovingly compassionate One. (Twice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
The divine Wisdom and Might, * the effulgent Light of the Father, * the 
eternal Word, the Son of the living God, * came in the flesh into the temple * 
and imparted His holy words of instruction unto the Jews, * those ungrateful 
and grievous ones, * and amazed by the wealth of His Wisdom, * they cried out 
saying: * By What means doth He know letters, ** since He hath not been 
taught by any man? 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: The divine Wisdom and Might ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
The Messiah and Lord of all * shut the mouths of the lawless scribes, * and 
rebuked the Jews as He cried out to them: * Judge not according to 
appearances, * O ye lawlessly disobedient ones. * For on the Sabbath I raised 
up and cured him that was paralyzed. * Wherefore I am the Lord of the Law 
and the Sabbath. * Why seek ye then to slay Me, ** Who have raised up the 
dead? 
Martyricon, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Nabutheus was killed with stones, * by the lawless and grievous ones, * 
from among the nation of the ungrateful Jews. * They sawed Esaias asunder 
with a saw fashioned from wood. * And they cast into the mire Jeremiah, the 
wise one. * And, on lifting up their own Lord upon the Cross, * they cried out 
saying: * Thou Who wouldst destroy the temple, ** save Thyself and we shall 
believe Thee. 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone IV: 
Having been enlightened by the Resurrection of Christ the Savior, * O ye 
brethren, * and having reached the midst of the feast of the Master, * let us 
truly keep the commandments of God, * that we may be deemed worthy to 
celebrate the Ascension ** and be vouchsafed the coming of the Holy Spirit. 
The Great Doxology (chanted), then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
Immediately there followeth the First hour, beginning with “Christ is 
Risen” three times. 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
MID-PENTECOST: WEDNESDAY OF THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, at the Beatitudes, 8 verses from ODE III and VI of the Canon. 
Thou didst open unto the Church the springs of life-creating waters, O 
good One, and didst cry: If any zealous man thirst, let him come and drink. 
(Twice) 
Thou didst say plainly that Thou wouldst be lifted up from earth unto 
heaven, and Thou didst promise to send the Holy Spirit from thence. 
The Lord, Who by nature is life-creating and Who was born of a Virgin, 
hath granted incorruption unto all the faithful, since He is compassionate. 
O Jesus, Who takest care for all the ends of the earth, Thou didst go up to 
the temple at Mid-feast, as John hath said, and taught the multitudes the Word 
of truth. 
Thou didst open Thy lips, O Master, and didst preach to the world the most 
pure Father and the all-holy Spirit, preserving Thy kinship with both even after 
Thine Incarnation. 
Glory ..., We all glorify the one Godhead in Trinity, the uncreated and 
undivided essence in three Hypostases, even the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, Who while being Three are One. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: We praise thee who didst remain a virgin after 
giving birth; thee alone do we glorify as both Virgin and Mother, O pure 
maiden, Bride of God; for from thee God truly became incarnate and thus 
Quickened us. 
At the Entrance: The Troparion for the Feast Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
The Prokeimenon: Great is our Lord, and great is His strength, * and of 
His understanding there is no measure. 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our God. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 14:6 - 18) 
In those days, Paul and Barnabas fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of 
Lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about: And there they preached 
the gospel. And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a 
cripple from his mother’s womb, who never had walked: The same heard Paul 
speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be 
healed, Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and 
walked. And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their 
voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the 
likeness of men. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, 
because he was the chief speaker. Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before 
their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done 
sacrifice with the people. Which when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard 
of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, And saying, 
Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and 
preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, 
which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein: Who 
in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left 
not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, 
and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And with these 
sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto 
them. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (7:14 - 30) 
At that time, when mid-feast was come, Jesus went up into the temple, and 
taught. And the Jews marveled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having 
never learned? Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his 
that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 
it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. He that speaketh of himself seeketh 
his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and 
no unrighteousness is in him. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of 
you keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me? The people answered and 
said, Thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill thee? Jesus answered and said 
unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel. Moses therefore gave unto 
you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the 
Sabbath day circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath day receive 
circumcision, that the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, 
because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day? Judge not 
according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Then said some of 
them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to kill? But, lo, he speaketh 
boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is 
the very Christ? Howbeit we know this man whence he is: but when Christ 
cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. Then cried Jesus in the temple as he 
taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not 
come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not. But I know 
him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me. Then they sought to take him: 
but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX of the Feast. 
Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing strange to 
virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * Therefore 
we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee blessed. 
Communion Verse: He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood 
abideth in Me and I in him, saith the Lord. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
Note: The Feast of Mid-Pentecost is celebrated for eight days. 
