--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 15th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
The all-holy mid-feast of the Savior’s Resurrection * hath now appeared like 
the brightness of noon, * shining upon the world with the divine grace of 
Christ’s arising, * flashing forth with incorruption’s unerring signs * revealing 
His Ascension into the heights. * The most bright feast of Pentecost is 
manifestly radiant * with the Holy Spirit’s descent to us. * Wherefore it 
bestoweth upon our souls ** peace and great mercy. 
Having reached the feast of Mid-Pentecost, * The Lord doth now impart 
the streams of His great compassion, * like unto a divine River of Glory, * 
crying aloud unto all: * “Ye that are athirst, come unto me and draw forth 
abundantly. * For I am a well-spring of empathy and an abyss of mercy, * 
pouring forth forgiveness upon the World, * purging sins, and expunging 
maladies’. * And He saveth them that keep His Resurrection’s memorial, * and 
doth protect them that honor and with love celebrate His Ascension in glory, ** 
granting unto our souls peace and great mercy. 
Having stood within the temple’s court, * He Who is the uncircumscribable 
God and Lord, * Who by nature is God, * and for our sake became incarnate, * 
and circumscribed in the flesh * poured forth for all mankind vivifying 
teachings, saying: * Be ye purified in your souls; * Quench the burning heat of 
the passions’. * Let no one be deprived of this draught, * for upon him that 
doth drink I bestow the divine grace * of an immortal and better heavenly 
Kingdom, * which he shall share with Me, the Creator, ** and thus be glorified. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Having come together at the Mid-feast * between Thy Resurrection and the 
divine coming of Thy Holy Spirit, O Christ, * we praise the mysteries of Thy 
wonders. ** Wherefore, on this day do Thou send down Thy great mercy unto 
us. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
 Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, of the Crucifixion, in Tone III: 
The tree of disobedience sprouted forth death for the world, * but the Tree 
of the Cross blossomed forth life and incorruption. * Wherefore, we worship 
Thee, the crucified Lord; * let the light of Thy countenance ** be signed upon 
us, O Lord. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
 Of the Resurrection: By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of 
death hath been abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while 
mankind, saved by faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee.  
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: O Lord, in truth great is the power of Thy Cross, * for affixed 
in one place, * it doth manifest itself throughout the world; * and from 
fishermen hath it shown forth apostles, * and from the nations, martyrs, ** that 
for our souls they all might offer intercession. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou, the Wisdom of God, * didst come unto the temple at Mid-feast, * 
teaching and reproving the disobedient Jews, * the Pharisees, and Scribes, * and 
with boldness didst Thou cry unto them: * He that thirsteth, let him come unto 
Me and drink living water, * and he shall never again thirst unto eternity. * 
From him that believeth in My goodness, * rivers of eternal life shall pour forth 
from his noetic belly. * O how great is Thy goodness and compassion, ** O 
Christ our God! Glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
At Mid-feast give ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., At Mid-feast 
give ... 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIX) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos, of the Crucifixion, in Tone III: 
When Thou didst willingly die and endure the Cross, * and wast well-pleased 
to be nailed thereto in the flesh, * Thou didst implant the Tree and fix it in the 
midst of creation, * the sun then hid its rays. * The thief beholding these things, 
cried unto Thee upon the Cross. * Remember me, O Savior! ** and believing, 
gained Paradise. 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God: * And worship at His footstool, for 
He is holy.  
Of the Resurrection: We the faithful theologize concerning the 
incomprehensible, * and inexplicable mystery of Thy Crucifixion, * and thine 
ineffable Resurrection. * On this day death and Hades have been despoiled, * 
while the race of mankind hath been clothed in immortality. * Wherefore we cry 
to Thee with thanksgiving: ** O Christ, glory be to Thine arising! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: The stout-heartedness of your patience * hath vanquished the 
devices of the enemy, the originator of evil, * O all-praised passion-bearers; * 
for this cause, ye were deemed worthy of eternal blessedness. * But intercede ye 
before the Lord, * that He save the flock of Christ-loving people, ** O ye 
witnesses to the truth. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Stavrotheotokion, in Tone III: 
Having obtained the Cross of thy Son as a staff of strength, * O Theotokos, 
* therewith we cast down the arrogance of the enemy, ** and with love unceas-
ingly magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XX) Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Thou, O Savior, dost pour out for all the world living waters * of wisdom 
and endless life, * inviting all to partake and to drink thereof; * for he who 
receiveth and keepeth Thy holy law * doth thereby quench the coals of 
deception. * Wherefore, he shall not thirst throughout the ages, * nor fail to be 
filled with Thee, O Master King of heaven. * For this cause we glorify Thy 
power, O Christ God, * asking that forgiveness of sins ** be abundantly granted 
unto us, Thy servants. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...” and the 50th 
Psalm. 
Then the 2nd Canon of Mid-Pentecost with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos, 
and 4 from the Menaion. At the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional 
Hymns from the Menaion, and the Sessional Hymn from the Mid-Pentecost. At 
the sixth ODE the Kontakion and Ikos of Mid-Pentecost. At the ninth ODE 
the Exapostilarion of Mid-Pentecost. The Canon in Tone VIII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Thou didst make the sea a wall; * Thou didst overwhelm boastful 
Pharaoh in the deep * together with his chariots. * Thou didst save the 
people dry-shod, O Lord, * and didst lead them forth to a mountain of 
sanctification, as they cried: * We shall sing a song of victory to Thee, our 
God, * for Thou hast been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Clap your hands, O ye nations; lament, O ye Hebrews. For Christ, the Giver 
of Life, hath broken asunder the bonds of Hades, and hath raised up the dead 
and healed sicknesses by a word. This is our God, Who granteth life unto them 
that believe in His Name. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst show a wonder by changing the water into wine, O Master, Who 
didst change the rivers of Egypt into blood. Thou didst also raise up the dead, 
accomplishing this sign in these latter times. Glory be to Thine ineffable 
counsel, O Savior; glory be to Thy self-abasement, whereby Thou hast renewed 
us. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art an ever-flowing stream of true life, O Lord; Thou art our 
Resurrection. Willingly didst Thou become weary, O my Savior, and willingly 
didst Thou thirst, submitting to the laws of nature. And when Thou camest to 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Sichar in the flesh, Thou didst ask the Samaritan woman for water, that Thou 
mightest drink. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst bless the loaves and multiply the fish, O incomprehensible God; 
Thou didst fill the people bounteously and didst promise an ever-flowing spring 
of wisdom to them that thirst. Thou art our God, O Savior, Who givest life 
unto them that believe in Thy Name. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: I glorify the Three Who are co-beginningless and of equal 
sovereignty: the Father, Who is beginningless God; the Son, Who is co-
beginningless; and the Spirit, Who is co-eternal with the Son; one essence in 
three Hypostases. I praise and honor one supreme sovereign Principle of the 
beginningless Godhead and Essence. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou alone didst contain within thy womb the Creator, O 
Birthgiver of God, ineffably conceiving Him in the flesh yet remaining a Virgin, 
while thy virginity in no wise suffered harm. Do thou ever entreat Him 
unceasingly on behalf of thy flock, since He is thy Son and God. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O ye people; 
* Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and from earth to 
heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my 
God, * my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in 
Thy salvation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Do not judge a judgment according to appearance, O ye Jews; thus, as it is 
written, said the Master when He came unto the temple and taught at the Judaic 
Mid-feast. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Do not judge a judgment according to appearance, O ye Jews, for Christ is 
come. The prophets named Him: He that cometh from Sion and hath restored 
the world. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Even though ye believe not His Words, O ye Jews, be convinced by the 
works of the Master. Why do ye deceive yourselves and disregard the Holy One, 
of Whom Moses wrote in the Law? 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
If the Messiah must assuredly come, O ye Jews, then the Messiah hath now 
come, Who is Christ. Why do ye deceive yourselves and disregard the Righteous 
One, of Whom Moses wrote in the Law? 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: We worship Thee, O Father, Who art beginningless in Thine 
essence, and we piously praise Thy beginningless Son and the all-holy Spirit, O 
ye Three Who are by nature one God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Though Thou art one of the Trinity, Thou didst assume flesh, 
neither undergoing change in Thine essence nor burning the uncorrupted 
womb of her that gave birth to Thee, O Lord, Who art wholly God and Fire. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast Thou didst stand in the temple’s court * in a god-befitting 
manner * and didst cry aloud: * Let him who doth suffer thirst now draw nigh 
unto Me and drink. * He that drinketh of the sacred water that I shall give, * 
from within shall the springs of My teachings issue forth. * Whosoever doth 
believe that the divine Father hath sent Me, * and that I came forth from Him, 
* with Me he shall be glorified. * Therefore we cry unto Thee: * Glory be to 
Thee, O Christ God, * Who dost cause the streams of Thy great love for 
mankind, * to abundantly well forth unto us, Thy servants. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: With noetic eyes the prophet Habbakuk * foresaw Thy coming, O 
Lord; * wherefore he cried aloud: * “God shall come out of Theman!” 
Glory to Thy power! * Glory to Thy condescension!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
If the Messiah must come, then Christ is the Messiah, O ye lawless ones; 
Why do ye not believe in Him? Behold, He is come, and the things He doeth 
bear witness to Him: He made the water into wine and strengthened the 
paralytic by a word. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since ye do not understand the Scriptures, ye are all deceived, O ye lawless 
Hebrews; for Christ is truly come and hath enlightened all mankind, showing 
forth many signs and wonders among you. In vain do ye deny Him Who is the 
true Life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Christ cried unto the Jews: One work have I shown unto you, and already ye 
marvel. Ye circumcise a man even on the Sabbath, He saith; Why then do ye 
accuse Me, Who have raised up a paralytic by a word? 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
I have done many works; for which work, then, do ye stone Me? cried 
Christ unto the Jews, reproaching them. For by a word I have made a man 
completely whole; judge not according to appearance, O ye men. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: O Trinity, undivided Unity; beginningless Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit; Thou Trinity in Unity; O life-creating, uncreated God, equal in honor 
and in rank: Save those who praise Thee, and deliver them from dangers and 
afflictions. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Bride of God and pure Virgin Mother, who didst contain 
God in thy womb while He yet remained uncircumscribed: Cease not to 
intercede on our behalf, that through thee we may be delivered from adversities, 
for unto thee do we ever flee for refuge. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Lord our God, bestow Thy peace upon us; * O Lord our God, 
take us for Thy possession; * O Lord, besides Thee we know none other: 
* and we call upon Thy Name. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having adorned Thine apostles with miracles and magnified Thy disciples 
with wonders throughout the World, Thou hast glorified them and bestowed 
upon them Thy Kingdom, O our Savior. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The disciples have enlightened all the ends of the earth with miracles and 
teachings, and in diverse ways they preached the word of Thy Kingdom, O 
Christ Savior. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
We send up praise unto Thy Kingdom, and we offer a hymn unto Thee 
Who didst appear on earth for our sake and didst enlighten the World and 
restore Adam. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Glory be to Thee, O holy Father, unbegotten God. Glory be to 
Thee, O timeless, only-begotten Word. Glory be to Thee, O divine Spirit, of 
one throne and of one essence with the Father and the Son. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy womb is become a holy table which holdeth the heavenly 
Bread, whereof he that eateth dieth not, as the Nourisher of all hath said, O 
Birthgiver of God. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, * the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The billows of life trouble me like the waters of the sea, * O Lover 
of Mankind. * Wherefore, like Jonah I cry unto Thee, O Word: * Raise up 
my life from corruption, O compassionate Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Jesus, Who takest care for all the ends of the earth, Thou didst go up to 
the temple at Mid-feast, as John hath said, and taught the multitudes the Word 
of truth. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst open Thy lips, O Master, and didst preach to the world the most 
pure Father and the all-holy Spirit, preserving Thy kinship with both even after 
Thine Incarnation. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst accomplish the work of the Father and didst confirm Thy words 
by Thy deeds, for Thou didst perform healings and signs, O Savior, raising the 
paralytic, cleansing lepers, and resurrecting the dead. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The beginningless Son received a beginning and became a man, taking upon 
Himself that which is proper to our nature. And at Mid-feast He taught and 
said: Hasten ye unto the ever-flowing Spring, that ye may draw forth life. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: We all glorify the one Godhead in Trinity, the uncreated and 
undivided essence in three Hypostases, even the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, Who while being Three are One. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We praise thee who didst remain a virgin after giving birth; thee 
alone do we glorify as both Virgin and Mother, O pure maiden, Bride of God; 
for from thee God truly became incarnate and thus Quickened us. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
Ikos: With the streams of Thy Blood do Thou Water my soul, which is 
grown dry and barren because of mine iniquities and offences, and show it forth 
to be fruitful in virtues. For Thou didst tell all to draw nigh Thee, O all-holy 
Word of God, and to draw forth the water of incorruption, which is living and 
which washeth away the sins of those who praise Thy glorious and divine 
arising. Unto them that know Thee as God, O good One, grant from on high 
the strength of the Spirit, which verily was borne by Thy disciples, for Thou art 
truly the Well-spring of life for all. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Chaldean furnace, burning with fire, * was bedewed by the 
Spirit * through the presence of God; * and the children chanted: * O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou Who art rest for all didst grow weary in the flesh; Thou Who art the 
well-spring of miracles didst willingly thirst. Thou didst seek after water, O 
Jesus, promising living water. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst converse with a Samaritan woman, O Lord, thereby reproving 
the mindlessness of the lawless Hebrews, insofar as she believed Thee to be the 
Son of God, and they denied Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Savior, Thou ever-living well-spring, Thou didst promise to grant living 
water which springeth forth, the water of immortality, unto those who with 
faith receive Thy Spirit, which proceedeth from the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
With five loaves Thou didst feed the thousands that hungered, and made the 
child’s morsels to be more than enough for yet another multitude, O Savior. 
Thus showing Thy glory unto Thy sacred disciples. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
He that eateth Thy Bread shall live forever, and he that drinketh Thy Blood 
abideth in Thee, my Savior, and Thou abidest in him, and Thou shalt raise him 
up at the last day.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou madest Thy dispensation wondrous, O Master, confirming by 
miracles Thy divine authority. Thou didst drive out illnesses, raise up the dead, 
and enlighten the blind, since Thou art God. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: We worship Thy timeless Father and the grace of the Spirit, 
which Thou as God didst apportion unto Thine apostles, sending them forth to 
preach, O Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Thou didst contain within thy womb the uncontainable Word, 
thou didst suckle at thy breasts Him that nourisheth the world and didst hold in 
thine arms our Sustainer, O pure Birthgiver of God. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children from the furnace, * became 
man, suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth clothe 
mortality with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only blessed and 
most glorious * God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Seated upon the throne of glory, * and unceasingly glorified as 
God, * O ye angels and heavens bless, ** hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages!. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Come, O ye peoples, and behold Him Who is praised upon a throne of 
glory, being blasphemed by lawless people. And as ye behold Him, praise Him 
as the Messiah, Who was foretold by the prophets. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art truly the Christ, Who hast come into the world. With Thee there is 
salvation and the remission of the failings of our fathers; Thou art indeed the 
Life of those who have come to believe in Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
As it is written, the Wisdom of God came into the temple at Mid-feast and 
taught that He is truly Christ the Messiah, from Whom there cometh salvation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
On the Sabbaths and on all days Christ wrought manifest signs, healing 
those in diverse illnesses. But the deceitful people were consumed with malice 
and wrath. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: Of a truth, the Trinity is one God, without the Father leaving 
that which is proper to Himself and assuming Sonship, nor with the Son 
transforming His attributes into procession. But I glorify the Three apart and 
together, as Light and God, throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Tell us, O Theotokos: How didst thou give birth unto Him 
Who hath shone forth timelessly from the Father and Who is praised together 
with the Holy Spirit? - except in a manner known only to Him Who was well-
pleased to be born from thee. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * 
wherein we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing 
strange to virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * 
Therefore we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee 
blessed. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
At the Judaic Mid-feast, O my Savior, Thou didst go up to Thy temple and 
didst teach all. And the Jews marveled and said: Whence knoweth this Man 
letters, having never learned? 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
My Redeemer performed wonders and signs, welling forth gifts of healings. 
He drove away illnesses and healed the ailing, but the Jews raged with frenzy at 
the multitude of His miracles. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
My Redeemer cried out as He reproached the disobedient Jews: Judge not 
according to appearance, but judge ye a righteous judgment. For the Law also 
commandeth that every man be circumcised, even if it be on the Sabbath. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
As Thou didst promise, O Savior, Thou didst grant the greater miracles unto 
Thy disciples when Thou didst send them to preach Thy glory unto the nations. 
And they proclaimed unto the world Thy grace and Resurrection and 
Incarnation. 
Refrain: Most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
Trinitarion: It is alien to the lawless to reverence the beginningless Trinity, 
even the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the uncreated Omnipotence, 
through Whom the whole world was established by the might of His power. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: Thou, O Virgin Mother, didst contain in thy womb Christ, the 
Giver of life, Who is One of the Trinity; Whom all creation praiseth and before 
Whom the thrones on high tremble. Do thou beseech Him, O all-blessed one, 
that our souls be saved. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of the Feast, in Tone III: 
O Thou that hast the never-emptying wine-bowl of gifts, * grant that I may 
draw water unto remission of my sins. * For with great thirst am I taken, ** O 
Thou only lovingly compassionate One.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, of the Crucifixion, in Tone III: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Through envy I have been cast out from joy, * since I have suffered a 
grievous fall. * But Thou didst not overlook me, O Master, * since for my sake 
Thou hast taken upon Thyself * what belongeth to my nature, and wast 
crucified; * Thereby leading me into glory and saving me. ** O my Redeemer, 
glory be to Thee.  
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: Through envy I have been cast out ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
Of the Resurrection: Come, all ye nations, learn the power of this awesome 
mystery; * for Christ our Savior, the Word Who was in the beginning, * was 
crucified for us, and was willingly buried, * and arose from the dead, that He 
might save all things. ** Him let us worship. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Martyricon: Come, all ye peoples, * let us honour the memory of the holy 
passion-bearers; * for they became a spectacle unto angels and mankind, * and 
received from Christ the crown of victory, ** and they intercede on behalf of 
our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VIII: 
At the Mid-feast of Pascha * Thou didst go up into the sacred temple, O our 
Savior. * And standing in the midst of the people, * Thou didst teach them with 
boldness, saying: * I am the Light of the world; * he that followeth Me shall not 
walk in darkness, ** but shall have the light of immortal life. 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Though Thou art ever with the Godhead, * Thou didst will to be * one with 
me, the lost one, that Thou mightest * thus save me from sin, * O Word and 
Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, * which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
The shadow hath now ceased; * for, Christ the Messiah, * at Mid-feast in 
the temple, * hath caused His grace to shine forth ** as though it were the 
morning star. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation 
in the midst of the earth. 
Ye who desire to drink of * My life-giving water, * come, with all due 
obedience * drink piously and gladly of grace; ** thus did our Savior cry. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Let us cleanse the treasury of our minds * and illumine the lamps of our 
souls, * and we shall behold Christ our Life coming to the temple, * in His 
exceeding goodness, * that He might triumph over the enemy * and save our 
race, through the Passion of the Cross * and the Resurrection. * And let us cry 
unto Him: ** O incomprehensible Lord, glory be to Thee. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath 
wrought might with His arm. * trampling down death by death; * becoming the 
first-born of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting 
the world great mercy.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
At Mid-feast give ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., At Mid-feast 
give ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
FRIDAY OF THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IV of the 2nd Canon, of Mid-
pentecost. 
If the Messiah must come, then Christ is the Messiah, O ye lawless ones; 
Why do ye not believe in Him? Behold, He is come, and the things He doeth 
bear witness to Him: He made the water into wine and strengthened the 
paralytic by a word. 
Since ye do not understand the Scriptures, ye are all deceived, O ye lawless 
Hebrews; for Christ is truly come and hath enlightened all mankind, showing 
forth many signs and wonders among you. In vain do ye deny Him Who is the 
true Life. 
Christ cried unto the Jews: One work have I shown unto you, and already ye 
marvel. Ye circumcise a man even on the Sabbath, He saith; Why then do ye 
accuse Me, Who have raised up a paralytic by a word? 
I have done many works; for which work, then, do ye stone Me? cried 
Christ unto the Jews, reproaching them. For by a word I have made a man 
completely whole; judge not according to appearance, O ye men. 
Glory ..., Trinitarion: O Trinity, undivided Unity; beginningless Father, Son, 
and Holy Spirit; Thou Trinity in Unity; O life-creating, uncreated God, equal in 
honor and in rank: Save those who praise Thee, and deliver them from dangers 
and afflictions. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: O Bride of God and pure Virgin Mother, who 
didst contain God in thy womb while He yet remained uncircumscribed: Cease 
not to intercede on our behalf, that through thee we may be delivered from 
adversities, for unto thee do we ever flee for refuge. 
At the Entrance The Troparion for the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 

--- PAGE 18 ---
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
The Prokeimenon: Great is our Lord, and great is His strength, * and of 
His understanding there is no measure. 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our God. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 10:44 - 11:10) 
In those days: While Peter spake, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which 
heard the word. And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, 
as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out 
the gift of the Holy Ghost. For they heard them speak with tongues, and 
magnify God. Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid water, that these 
should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And 
he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they 
him to tarry certain days. And the apostles and brethren that were in Judaea 
heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God. And when Peter was 
come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him, 
Saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them. But 
Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order unto 
them, saying, I was in the city of Joppa praying: and in a trance I saw a vision, A 
certain vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by 
four corners; and it came even to me: Upon the which when I had fastened 
mine eyes, I considered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, 
and creeping things, and fowls of the air. And I heard a voice saying unto me, 
Arise, Peter; slay and eat. But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing common or 
unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth. But the voice answered me 
again from heaven, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common. And 
this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into heaven. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (8:21 - 30) 
Jesus said unto the Jews who came unto Him: I go my way, and ye shall seek 
me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come. Then said the Jews, 
Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come. And he 
said unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I 
am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for 
if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. Then said they unto him, 
Who art thou? And Jesus saith unto them, Even the same that I said unto you 
from the beginning. I have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that 
sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of 
him. They understood not that he spake to them of the Father. Then said Jesus 
unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I 
am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I 
speak these things. And he that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me 
alone; for I do always those things that please him. As he spake these words, 
many believed on him. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX of the Feast. 
Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing strange to 
virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * Therefore 
we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee blessed. 
 
Communion Verse: He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood 
abideth in Me and I in him, saith the Lord. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
 
 
 
