--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. No Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
The all-holy mid-feast of the Savior’s Resurrection * hath now appeared like 
the brightness of noon, * shining upon the world with the divine grace of 
Christ’s arising, * flashing forth with incorruption’s unerring signs * revealing 
His Ascension into the heights. * The most bright feast of Pentecost is 
manifestly radiant * with the Holy Spirit’s descent to us. * Wherefore it 
bestoweth upon our souls ** peace and great mercy. 
Having reached the feast of Mid-Pentecost, * The Lord doth now impart 
the streams of His great compassion, * like unto a divine River of Glory, * 
crying aloud unto all: * “Ye that are athirst, come unto me and draw forth 
abundantly. * For I am a well-spring of sympathy and an abyss of mercy, * 
pouring forth forgiveness upon the World, * purging sins, and expunging 
maladies’. * And He doth save them that keep His Resurrection’s memorial, * 
and doth protect them that honor and with love celebrate His Ascension in 
glory, ** granting unto our souls peace and great mercy. 
Having stood within the temple’s court, * He Who is the uncircumscribable 
God and Lord, * Who by nature is God, * and for our sake became incarnate, * 
and circumscribed in the flesh * poured forth for all mankind vivifying 
teachings, saying: * Be ye purified in your souls; * Quench the burning heat of 
the passions’. * Let no one be deprived of this draught, * for upon him that 
doth drink I bestow the divine grace * of an immortal and better heavenly 
Kingdom, * which he shall share with Me, the Creator, ** and thus be glorified. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou, the Wisdom of God, * didst come unto the temple at Mid-feast, * 
teaching and reproving the disobedient Jews, * the Pharisees, and Scribes, * and 
with boldness didst Thou cry unto them: * He that thirsteth, let him come unto 
Me and drink living water, * and he shall never again thirst unto eternity. * 
From him that believeth in My goodness, * rivers of eternal life shall pour forth 
from his noetic belly. * O how great is Thy goodness and compassion, ** O 
Christ our God! Glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:  
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the 
Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house 
of our God. 
 Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone IV: 
Unceasingly worshiping Thy life-giving Cross, O Christ God, * we glorify 
Thy Resurrection on the third day, * for through it, O All-powerful one, * Thou 
hast renewed corrupted human nature * and shown us the way to heaven, ** 
since Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
A Hymn of Compunction: O Lord, I desired to blot out with my tears * the 
handwriting of all mine iniquities, * and thus to please Thee with repentance for 
the rest of my life, * but the enemy beguileth me and ever warreth against my 
soul. * O Lord, before I utterly perish, ** do Thou save me. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: O Thou Who art glorified in the memorial of Thy Saints, * O 
Christ God: * since Thou art entreated by them, ** do Thou send down upon 
us Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Having come together on the Mid-feast * between Thy Resurrection and the 
divine coming of Thy Holy Spirit, O Christ, * We praise the mysteries of Thy 
wonders. ** Wherefore, on this day, do Thou send down Thy great mercy unto 
us. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
At Mid-feast give ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., At Mid-feast 
give ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. IV) The following Sessional Hymns 
from the Oktoechos, of the Resurrection, in Tone IV: 
Looking into the entrance of the tomb, the myrrh-bearing women * were 
unable to endure the bright radiance of the angel, * trembling in awe they said; * 
“How is it that He who hath opened Paradise to the Thief hath been stolen? * 
How is it that He who before His passion proclaimed His arising hath been 
raised? ** Truly Christ God hath arisen, granting those in Hades life and 
resurrection.” 
Verse: O Lord condemn me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Hymn of Compunction: Do Thou visit my lowly soul, O Lord, * which hath 
wasted its whole life in sins; * and as Thou didst receive the harlot, ** receive 
me also, and save me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: Today, on the commemoration of the passion-bearers, * the 
hosts of angels are present * to enlighten the minds of the faithful * and to 
make the World radiant with grace. * Since Thou art entreated by them, O God, 
* grant unto us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
An invincible wall art thou for us Christians, O Virgin Theotokos; * for We 
who flee unto thee for refuge remain unharmed. * And though we sin, we cry 
out to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of Grace, the Lord is with thee. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. V) Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The Wisdom of God the Father, * which was granted to the apostles by the 
Word of God, * to preach unto the ends of the world, of the coming of Him, * 
Who was vilified and defamed as a deceiver by the errant Hebrews, * Who 
without malice said unto them: * Cast not judgment upon me unjustly * O ye 
lawless ones. * Let us therefore cry unto Him: * O Christ God in Thy love for 
mankind, * send down upon us the forgiveness sins, ** who with faith hymn 
and praise Thine incomparable glory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th Psalm. 
Then the 1st Canon of Mid-Pentecost with 8 Troparia, including the Irmos, 
and 4 from the Menaion. At the third ODE, the Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional 
Hymns from the Menaion and the Sessional Hymn from Mid-Pentecost. At the 
sixth ODE the Kontakion and Ikos of Mid-Pentecost. At the ninth ODE the 
Exapostilarion of Mid-Pentecost. The Canon in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of 
old, * and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * 
the power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The great benefactions and gifts, the graces and divine illuminations of 
Thine incomprehensible and divine Incarnation, do Thou abundantly pour 
forth and shine upon us, O Master.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
At Mid-feast Thou hast come, O Christ, manifestly sending forth the radiant 
flashes of Thy Godhead; for Thou art the joyous Festival of the saved and the 
Cause of our salvation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art become wisdom, righteousness from God, and redemption for us, 
O Lord. Thou dost convey us from earth to the height of heaven, and dost 
grant us the divine Spirit. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy flesh knew not corruption in the sepulcher, O Master. 
Rather, inasmuch as it was formed without seed, it received not corruption, for 
in a transcendent manner it was not subject to the order of nature. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Katavasia: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O ye people; 
* Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and from earth to 
heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O 
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst open unto the Church the springs of life-creating waters, O 
good One, and didst cry: If any zealous man thirst, let him come and drink. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst say plainly that Thou wouldst be lifted up from earth unto 
heaven, and Thou didst promise to send the Holy Spirit from thence. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The Lord, Who by nature is life-creating and Who was born of 
a Virgin, hath granted incorruption unto all the faithful, since He is 
compassionate. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast Thou didst stand in the temple’s court * in a god-befitting 
manner * and didst cry aloud: * Let him who doth suffer thirst now draw nigh 
unto Me and drink. * He that drinketh of the sacred water that I shall give, * 
from within shall the springs of My teachings issue forth. * Whosoever doth 
believe that the divine Father hath sent Me, * and that I came forth from Him, 
* with Me he shall be glorified. * Therefore we cry unto Thee: * Glory be to 
Thee, O Christ God, * Who dost cause the streams of Thy great love for 
mankind, * to abundantly well forth unto us, Thy servants. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having shattered the gates of death by Thy might, Thou hast made known 
the ways of life; and Thou didst open the gates of immortality unto them that 
cry with faith: Glory be to Thy power, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since Thou Who art beginningless dost have in the grasp of Thy hand the 
beginning of all things, and dost hold fast their middle and final end as well, 
Thou didst stand in the midst and cry aloud: Come, O ye of godly mind; enjoy 
the divine gifts. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since Thou as God hast authority over all things, and as one mighty didst 
destroy the dominion of death, O Christ, Thou didst promise to send the Holy 
Spirit, Who proceedeth from the Father. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Mother who knewest not wedlock, thou dost 
bestow grace abundantly upon those who praise thee; and from the Word Who 
is before the ages and Who was born from thee, thou dost entreat for the 
forgiveness of their offences. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy 
Light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy 
praises in faith. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having reached the middle of the divine feasts, let us be godly-wise and 
zealously adorn ourselves with the perfection of divine virtue. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
How truly sacred is this present feast; for it marketh the mid-point of the 
great feasts and doth shine forth from both. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The mind of the Archangel is not able to comprehend Thine 
ineffable and most pure birthgiving from a Virgin, O my greatly merciful Savior. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, * the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * “I will sacrifice unto 
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the 
demons’ * by the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
The mid-point of Pentecost hath come this day. By the former feast it is 
illumined with the most divine radiance of the divine Pascha, and by the latter 
feast it is made to shine with the grace of the Comforter. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
While standing in the temple, O Christ, Thou didst speak unto the 
assemblies of the Jews and didst reveal Thine own glory, thereby manifesting 
Thy consubstantiality with the Father. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Be thou my protection and mine unshaken rampart, O only 
Mother of God. Redeem me from the stumbling-blocks of the world, and 
illumine me by thy divine effulgence. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
Ikos: With the streams of Thy Blood do Thou Water my soul, which is 
grown dry and barren because of mine iniquities and offences, and show it forth 
to be fruitful in virtues. For Thou didst tell all to draw nigh Thee, O all-holy 
Word of God, and to draw forth the water of incorruption, which is living and 
which washeth away the sins of those who praise Thy glorious and divine 

--- PAGE 9 ---
arising. Unto them that know Thee as God, O good One, grant from on high 
the strength of the Spirit, which verily was borne by Thy disciples, for Thou art 
truly the Well-spring of life for all. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having dispelled the power of death by Thy might, O Savior, Thou hast 
made known unto all mankind the path of life. With thankfulness they cry to 
Thee: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Beholding Thee bearing flesh, the assemblies of the Hebrew people did not 
recognize Thee, O Word of God; but we sing to Thee: Blessed art Thou in the 
temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice O sanctified and divine tabernacle of the Most High; 
for through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been granted to those who cry: 
Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Lady. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children from the furnace, * became 
man, suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth clothe 
mortality with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only blessed and 
most glorious * God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having arisen from the grave as one comely, and adorned with the glory of 
the Godhead, O Lord, Thou didst appear unto Thine apostles and didst 
promise to send the power of the Spirit unto those who cry aloud: Bless ye the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
In a manner befitting Thee, since Thou as God art the supreme Author of 
life, Thou didst slay Hades and didst well forth eternal life unto all, wherefore 
the graces of these radiant days now constitute a most clear image of the 
everlasting life of those who cry: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst cause rays of righteousness to shine upon the world like the sun, 
O Christ, in that Thou didst send Thine apostles unto the world. Bearing Thee, 
the incomprehensible Light, they drove away the darkness of ignorance, and 
cried: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Behold now, a prince and ruler hath manifestly come from the 
tribe of Judah, for thou, O all-immaculate one, hast given birth to Him Who is 
the Expectation of the nations which were set aside for Him aforetime. Yea, 
thou hast borne Christ, to Whom we chant: Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * 
wherein we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Since we have learned from Christ a new and unprecedented way of life, let 
us all be especially diligent to preserve it until the end, that We may enjoy the 
presence of the Holy Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
O Life-Giving Savior, Thou didst clothe my mortal nature with the garment 
of immortality and the grace of incorruption, and didst raise it up together with 
Thyself. Thou didst lead it unto the Father, having dispelled my warfare of 
many years. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Since we have been restored again to the life of heaven by virtue of the 
mediation of Him Who emptied Himself even so far as to assume the form of a 
servant and hath exalted us, let us magnify Him as is meet. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: All we the faithful have put our trust in thee, and we acclaim 
thee with songs of praise as the root, source, and cause of incorruption, O 
Virgin, for thou didst well forth for us the Hypostatic Immortality. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of the Feast, in Tone III: 
O Thou that hast the never-emptying wine-bowl of gifts, * grant that I may 
draw water unto remission of my sins. * For with great thirst am I taken, ** O 
Thou only lovingly compassionate One.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
O Thou Who didst endure the Cross and death, * and didst arise from the 
dead, O Almighty Lord, ** we glorify Thy Resurrection.  
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: O Thou Who didst endure the Cross ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
A Hymn of Compunction: I am a sheep of Thy rational flock, * and I flee 
unto Thee, the Good Shepherd. ** Seek me out who am gone astray, O God, 
and have mercy on me. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Martyricon: Who would not be astonished, O holy martyrs, * on beholding 
the good fight which ye fought? * Who while confessing Christ and armed with 
the Cross, * vanquished the bodiless enemy, though ye were in the body? * 
Wherefore, ye were worthily shown forth * as expellers of demons and 
adversaries of the heathen. ** Intercede ye unceasingly that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VIII: 
At the Mid-feast of Pascha * Thou didst go up into the sacred temple, O our 
Savior. * And standing in the midst of the crowd, Thou didst teach them with 
boldness and say: * I am the Light of the World; * he that followeth Me shall 
not Walk in darkness, ** but shall have the light of immortal life. 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Bowing the heavens down, Thou didst come, * O my Savior, * and take 
flesh of the Virgin, * remaining unchanged whilst welling forth ** forgiveness 
unto me. 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, * which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Though Thou art ever with the Godhead, * Thou didst will to be one with 
me, * the lost one, * that Thou mightest thus save me from sin, ** O Word and 
Lover of mankind. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 
O King of all, Thou art * the Wisdom of the Godhead, * through Whom in 
boundless wisdom * the Father with the Spirit ** created the whole universe. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Let us cleanse the treasury of our minds * and illumine the lamps of our 
souls, * and we shall behold Christ our Life coming to the temple, * in His 
exceeding goodness, * that He might triumph over the enemy * and save our 
race, through the Passion of the Cross * and the Resurrection. * And let us cry 
unto Him: ** O incomprehensible Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
At Mid-feast give ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., At Mid-feast 
give ..., 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
MONDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE 7 of the 1st Canon of Mid-Pentecost. 
In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, burning 
with a love of piety rather than by a flame of fire, cried aloud saying: Blessed art 
Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. (Twice) 
Having dispelled the power of death by Thy might, O Savior, Thou hast 
made known unto all mankind the path of life. With thankfulness they cry to 
Thee: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Beholding Thee bearing flesh, the assemblies of the Hebrew 
people did not recognize Thee, O Word of God; but we sing to Thee: Blessed 
art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice O sanctified and divine tabernacle of the 
Most High; for through thee, O Theotokos, joy hath been granted to those who 
cry: Blessed art thou among women, O most immaculate Lady. 
At the Entrance: The Troparion for the Feast Tone VIII: 
 In the midst of the feast, give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters 
of piety; * for Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let 
him come to Me and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our 
God, glory be to Thee. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, and for the Saint, if there be 
any, Then: 
Glory ..., of the Samaritan, in Tone VIII:  
Having come to the well in faith, * the Samaritan woman beheld Thee, the 
Water of Wisdom * whereof having drunk abundantly, she, the renowned one, 
** inherited the Kingdom on high forever.  
 Both now ..., of Mid-Pentecost, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
The Prokeimenon: Great is our Lord, and great is His strength, * and of 
His understanding there is no measure. 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our God. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 12:12 - 17) 
In those days, Peter came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose 
surname was Mark; where many were gathered together praying. And as Peter 
knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda. And 
when she knew Peter’s voice, she opened not the gate for gladness, but ran in, 
and told how Peter stood before the gate. And they said unto her, Thou art 
mad. But she constantly affirmed that it was even so. Then said they, It is his 
angel. But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door, and 
saw him, they were astonished. But he, beckoning unto them with the hand to 
hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the 
prison. And he said, Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren. 
And he departed, and went into another place. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (8:42 - 51) 
Jesus said unto the Jews who came unto Him: If God were your Father, ye 
would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of 
myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye 
cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your 
father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the 
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of 
his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I tell you the truth, ye 
believe me not. Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why 
do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth God’s words: ye therefore hear 
them not, because ye are not of God. Then answered the Jews, and said unto 
him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? Jesus answered, 

--- PAGE 16 ---
I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me. And I seek 
not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth. Verily, verily, I say 
unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX of the Feast. 
Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing strange to 
virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * Therefore 
we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee blessed. 
Communion Verse: He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood 
abideth in Me and I in him, saith the Lord. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
 
 
 
