--- PAGE 1 ---
TUESDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
WEDNESDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
The Apodosis of Mid-Pentecost is served. Except for the scriptural 
readings at Vespers, which are omitted, we chant everything as set forth 
on the Feast of Mid-Pentecost in Vespers, Matins; and for the Liturgy: 
 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IX of Mid-Pentecost.. 
Since we have learned from Christ a new and unprecedented way of life, let 
us all be especially diligent to preserve it until the end, that We may enjoy the 
presence of the Holy Spirit. 
O Life-Giving Savior, Thou didst clothe my mortal nature with the garment 
of immortality and the grace of incorruption, and didst raise it up together with 
Thyself. Thou didst lead it unto the Father, having dispelled my warfare of 
many years. 
Since we have been restored again to the life of heaven by virtue of the 
mediation of Him Who emptied Himself even so far as to assume the form of a 
servant and hath exalted us, let us magnify Him as is meet. 
At the Judaic Mid-feast, O my Savior, Thou didst go up to Thy temple and 
didst teach all. And the Jews marveled and said: Whence knoweth this Man 
letters, having never learned? 
Glory ..., It is alien to the lawless to reverence the beginningless Trinity, 
even the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the uncreated Omnipotence, 
through Whom the whole world was established by the might of His power. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou, O Virgin Mother, didst contain in thy 
womb Christ, the Giver of life, Who is One of the Trinity; Whom all creation 
praiseth and before Whom the thrones on high tremble. Do thou beseech Him, 
O all-blessed one, that our souls be saved. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion for the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
At Mid-feast give Thou my thirsty soul to drink of the waters of piety; * for 
Thou, O Savior, didst cry out to all: * Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to Me 
and drink. ** Wherefore, O Well-spring of life, Christ our God, glory be to 
Thee. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the Mid-feast, in Tone IV: 
Having come to the Mid-feast of the Judaic Law, * O Master and Creator of 
all things, * Thou didst cry unto those present, O Christ God: * Come hither 
and draw forth the water of immortality. * Wherefore, we fall down before 
Thee and faithfully cry aloud: * Grant unto us Thy compassions, ** for Thou 
art truly the Well-spring of our life. 
 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
The Prokeimenon: Great is our Lord, and great is His strength, * and of 
His understanding there is no measure. 
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing; let praise be sweet 
unto our God. 
 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 13:13 - 13:24) 
In those days: Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, and came to 
Perga in Pamphylia: and John departing from them returned to Jerusalem. But 
when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into 
the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down. And after the reading of the 
law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye 
men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. 
Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, Men of Israel, and ye 
that fear God, give audience. The God of this people of Israel chose our 
fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of 
Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it. And about the time of 
forty years suffered he their manners in the wilderness. And when he had 
destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he divided their land to them 
by lot. And after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four 
hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet. And afterward they desired a 
king: and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of 
Benjamin, by the space of forty years. And when he had removed him, he raised 
up unto them David to be their king; to whom also he gave their testimony, and 
said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which 
shall fulfill all my will. Of this man’s seed hath God according to his promise 
raised unto Israel a Savior, Jesus: When John had first preached before his 
coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Remember Thy congregation, which Thou hast purchased from 
the beginning. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in 
the midst of the earth. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (6:5 - 14) 
At that time: Jesus lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto 
him, and saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat? And 
this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do. Philip 
answered him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, 
that every one of them may take a little. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon 
Peter’s brother, saith unto him, There is a lad here, which hath five barley 
loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many? And Jesus said, 
Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat 
down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves; and when he 
had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that 
were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would. When they 
were filled, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that 
nothing be lost. Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve 
baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and 
above unto them that had eaten. Then those men, when they had seen the 
miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into 
the world. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX of the Feast. 
Virginity is alien to motherhood, * and childbearing is a thing strange to 
virgins: * yet in thee, O Theotokos, both have come to pass. * Therefore 
we, and all the nations of the earth, * without ceasing call thee blessed. 
Communion Verse: He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood 
abideth in Me and I in him, saith the Lord. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
