--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 15th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having ascended the Cross, O Lord ...”: 
Come, see Him of Whom Moses in the Law spake of old, * Jesus, the 
Messiah Who hath appeared out of His tender compassion, * and as a man, 
spake to me at the well. * In truth this is Christ God, Who hath come into the 
world. ** Thus spake the Samaritan woman to those in Sichar. 
When those in the city * had partaken of the sweet water that poured forth 
from the mouth of the woman, * they quickly hastened to come to the well * to 
drink from that bountiful Fount, * and to see the ever-flowing Well-spring ** 
which refresheth parched souls athirst for life. 
Having beheld the Fount of life, * Who was one in form and nature with 
mortal man, * all they that were in the city cried unto the woman: * Not only on 
account of thy words do we believe, * but we have come to know ** that this is 
the everlasting redemption and salvation of the world. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
By Jacob’s Well, Jesus found the Samaritan woman. * He that covereth the 
earth with clouds asked water of her. * O wonder! He that rideth on the 
cherubim speaketh with a harlot woman, * asking for water, * He Who hath 
suspended the earth upon the waters. * He Who causeth springs and pools of 
waters to flow forth seeketh water, * for He wished to draw to Himself her that 
was truly ensnared by the contending enemy, * and to impart the water of life 
unto her * who was sorely inflamed with unseemly deeds, ** for He alone is 
compassionate and the Lover of mankind.  
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, of the Crucifixion, in Tone IV: 
Ever having Thy Cross as a help, O Christ, * we readily trample underfoot 
** the snares of the enemy.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Of the Resurrection: O Lord, by ascending the Cross * Thou hast wiped out 
our ancestral curse, * and by descending into Hades * Thou hast set free those 
enchained therein from all ages, * granting incorruption to mankind; * 
wherefore with hymns ** we glorify Thy life-giving and saving arising. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: Ye living sacrifices, * rational whole-burnt offerings, * O ye 
martyrs of the Lord, * perfect sacrificial victims of God, * who know God and 
are known by God. * Lambs whose fold is inaccessible to wolves: * Intercede 
that, together with you, ** we may also be shepherded beside the water of rest. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Thus saith the Lord unto the woman of Samaria: * If thou knewest the gift 
of God, * and Who it is that saith to thee: * Give Me water to drink, * thou 
wouldst have asked Him, * and He would have given unto thee to drink, ** that 
thou mightest never thirst unto eternity, saith the Lord.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Having learned the joyful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIX) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God: * And worship at His footstool, for 
He is holy.  
Of the Crucifixion: The Jews, O my Savior, * nailed Thee to the Tree of the 
Cross. * Through it Thou didst summon us from among the nations, O Christ 
God. * Stretching out Thy hands out on its wood of Thine own will, * Thou 
didst not disdain to have a lance pierce Thy pure side. ** Thy many 
compassions do we glorify, O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: Thy martyrs, O Lord, * contested for Thee, * and were granted 
crowns of incorruptibility, * given by Thee, our God. * Possessing Thy strength 
they cast down the tyrants * and wholly destroyed the demons’ feeble 
presumptions. ** By their intercessions save our souls. 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Stavrotheotokion, in Tone IV: 
On seeing Thee lifted up upon the Tree of the Cross, * Thine undefiled 
Mother struck up a maternal lament * and cried out, O Word of God: * What is 
this new wonder, O my Son, * this strange marvel? * How dost Thou taste of 
death, O Life of all? * desiring to quicken the dead, ** since Thou art 
compassionate. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XX) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
From an earthly and corruptible well, * the Samaritan woman usually came 
to draw water, * but instead she drew living water: * For she found there seated 
beside the well * that well-spring of the Patriarch Jacob, ** which doth quench 
the raging fever of all the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th 
Psalm. For the Canons: the Canon of The Samaritan woman with its Irmos to 
make eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. At the 
Third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, Glory ..., 
Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the Samaritan woman. At the Sixth ODE 
the Kontakion and Ikos of Samaritan woman. At the Ninth Ode, the 
Exapostilarion of Pascha and the Samaritan woman. The Canon in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: O Thou Who smote Egypt and drowned the tyrant Pharaoh in the 
sea, * Thou didst save from slavery * the people who like Moses chanted 
a hymn of victory, * for He hath been glorified.  
He that was buried is risen, and hath thereby raised up with Himself the 
race of mankind. Let all creation rejoice, and let the noetic clouds today openly 
rain down righteousness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Lord, Who supportest Thy chambers in the waters, since Thou art the 
Water of Life, Thou didst grant Thine honored waters unto the Samaritan 
woman who besought Thee, having learned of Thy compassion.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: O Thou Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, save those who glorify 
Thee with sincere faith, since Thou art the Creator of all, and grant unto us 
forgiveness of sins, inasmuch as Thou art supremely good. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Theotokion: Rejoice, O fiery throne; rejoice, O all-golden lampstand; 
rejoice, O cloud of light; rejoice, O palace of the Word and spiritual table, 
which did worthily bear Christ, the Bread of life. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: My heart hath been firmly established * in the Lord my God: * for 
by Him the weak have been girded * with strength. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
An angel shining like lightning spake unto the myrrh-bearers: Why are ye 
astonished? Why do ye bring myrrh and seek the Master in the grave, O ye 
women? He is risen, and hath raised the world up with Himself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Since Thou art the Life and Well-spring of immortality, Thou didst sit 
down at the well, O compassionate One, and didst fill with Thy supremely wise 
waters the Samaritan woman who besought Thee and praised Thee.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: The Father, the Son, and the divine Spirit are praised as one 
God in Trinity over all, Whom the orders of the heavens glorify with fear as 
they cry out clearly: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou O Lord. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Having inexplicably conceived in thy womb the God of all, O 
Virgin Mother, thou didst give birth in a manner transcending mind and speech, 
and didst remain a virgin, even as thou wast before giving birth, O Bride of 
God. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Let heaven joyfully resound and exult now, * and let all things here upon 
earth dance in gladness; * for from a Virgin, Christ God hath appeared as a 
man. * By His death He hath redeemed mortal mankind from corruption. * By 
great signs He shone forth upon the Samaritan woman. * Requesting water, He 
bestowed on her the source of healings, ** since He is the Lover of mankind.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am in fear. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Christ died, thy dominion was swallowed up, O Death. At His 
arising the dead came forth from the graves as from bridal chambers.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Lord, Thou didst grant knowledge of Thy power unto the Samaritan 
woman who asked water of Thee; wherefore, she thirsteth not throughout the 
ages and doth praise Thee.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: O Father and Word and divine Spirit, O Trinity, transcendent 
in essence, co-beginningless and of one power: Save us all who faithfully praise 
Thee.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Of old the lawgiver beheld thee as an unburning bush, and 
Daniel perceived thee as a holy mountain, O only Lady and Virgin Mother. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for 
my soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, 
* and unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the myrrh-bearers reached Thy holy sepulcher early in the morning, 
they beheld a youth shining like lightning, and they were astonished on learning 
of Thy divine arising, O Christ.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Since Thou art the Source of life, O Lord, Thou didst grant the water of 
forgiveness and knowledge unto the Samaritan woman who asked for it of old; 
wherefore, we praise Thine ineffable compassion.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: We reverence the Unity of three hypostases, the Trinity one in 
essence: Father, Word and Holy Spirit, one God undivided in nature, the 
Creator and Lord and Master of all.  
Theotokion: We call thee the impassable gate, the untilled land, the ark 
bearing the Manna, a vessel and lamp-stand and the censer of the immaterial 
Ember, O pure One.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Let not the watery tempest drown me, * nor the abyss destroy me; 
* for I have been cast into the heart of the deep of the sea. * Wherefore, 
like Jonah I cry aloud to Thee: * Raise up my life from the corruption of  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst mightily shatter the bars and gates of Hades and didst arise, 
since Thou art God, O Master. Upon meeting the women, Thou didst say unto 
them: Rejoice. And Thou didst send them to tell the disciples: He that liveth is 
risen and hath appeared, enlightening the ends of the earth.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Since Thou, O Lord, art a bounteous stream of life and an abyss of mercy, 
O good One, while journeying Thou didst sit down near the well of the oath 
and didst cry unto the Samaritan woman: Give Me water to drink, that thou 
mayest receive the waters of forgiveness.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: I faithfully praise the beginningless Father, and the Son Who is 
of one rank with Him and the Spirit Who is consubstantial with Them, even 
one Essence, and Nature, and Glory, and one Kingdom, the God and Creator 
of all, the Sustainer of all things, together with the bodiless powers.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us! 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theotokion: We praise thee, for thou alone didst give birth as a virgin and 
didst keep thy womb incorrupt, O pure One, throne of the Lord, gate and 
mountain, noetic lamp, bridal chamber of God which art full of light, manifest 
tabernacle of glory, thou ark and vessel and table.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion of the Samaritan woman, in Tone VIII: 
Having come to the well in faith, * the Samaritan woman beheld Thee, the 
Water of Wisdom * whereof having drunk abundantly, she, the renowned one, 
** inherited the Kingdom on high forever.  
Ikos: Let us hear of the noble mysteries, as John teacheth us what cometh 
to pass in Samaria, how the Lord speaketh unto a woman, asking water of her, 
even He that gathered the waters into the places where they are gathered, and 
Who is of one throne with the Father and the Spirit; for He, the renowned One, 
came, seeking out His image forever.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Forsake us not to the end for Thy names sake, * for we have not 
forsaken Thy commandments, * and take not Thy mercy from us * O 
Lord God of our Fathers, * who art supremely hymned throughout the 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having descended with Thy soul into the lower reaches of Hades, all of 
those who were bound and whom death, the bitter tyrant, had held from all 
ages Thou didst courageously lead forth, as they cried unto Thee, O Christ 
God: Glory be to Thy dread dispensation.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art the Water of Life, cried the Samaritan woman unto Christ. Give 
me to drink, therefore, who always thirst for Thy divine grace, O Word, that I 
may no longer be held by the drought of ignorance, but may proclaim Thy 
mighty acts, O Lord Jesus.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Trinitarion: We praise the Father and the Son and the divine Spirit, the 
Trinity undivided in nature and divided in Hypostases, one Essence naturally 
united, the beginningless Creator and God of all, Whom all the orders of the 
heavens praise.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: After an awesome childbirth thou wast preserved a pure Virgin, 
O holy Theotokos. Wherefore, with unceasing voices all the choirs of angels 
and all the generations of men praise thee, the pure vessel of the Uncontainable 
One.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In wisdom hast Thou fashioned all things, O Master, * Thou 
didst establish the earth firmly upon the fathomless depths of the waters, 
* in accordance with Thy knowledge, * wherefore we hymn Thee 
chanting: * Unceasingly bless ye the Lord all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou wast willingly raised up on the Tree, O long-suffering One; the rocks 
were rent asunder, the sun was quenched, the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain, the earth was shaken, and Hades shuddered with fear and loosed all that 
were in bonds.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst appear unto them that sat in darkness, O Lord, since Thou art 
the unwaning Light and the Life of all. Wherefore, as the assembly of the 
righteous beheld Thee, O Word, they leaped for joy and cried out: Thou art 
come to loose all from their bonds; we praise Thy dominion.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: We praise the Father Who is beginningless from before all time, 
the Son Who is co-beginningless, and the Holy Spirit, the Three Who are one 
God, un-commingled, undivided, the Creator of all, the self-determining 
dominion of one might, and we cry: O ye works of the Lord, unceasingly bless 
ye the Lord.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: By a live coal was Isaiah cleansed, thereby proclaiming 
aforetime the noetic Ember Which was incarnate of thee in a manner 
surpassing comprehension, O Virgin, and Which burneth away all the substance 
of the sins of mortal men, and deifieth our nature in His compassion, O all-
imaculate One.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The God of Israel hath shown strength with His arm, * for He 
hath put down the mighty from their thrones, * and exalted them of low 
degree * The daystar from on high Who hath visited us, * and firmly 
established us on the path of peace.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having destroyed the tyranny of death, O Christ, Thou camest forth from 
the grave like a comely bridegroom coming forth from a bridal chamber. Thou 
didst shatter the bars of Hades by divine might, and Thou didst illumine the 
world with the noetic light of Thine arising.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Let us all now form spiritual choirs and cry: The Lord is risen; let the earth 
rejoice, let heaven be glad, let the clouds drop down the rain of righteousness 
upon us who celebrate radiantly and praise Christ.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: The Unity of threefold splendor, even the beginningless Father, 
Son and Spirit, is one Godhead, the Life and Creator of all, one indivisible 
Light. Together with the Bodiless let us praise Him with thrice-holy songs as we 
speak of things sacred, O ye faithful.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Since thou art become a dwelling-place of the Light, O pure 
One, illumine thou the eyes of my soul, which have been darkened through the 
many devices of the enemy, and grant that with a pure heart I may see clearly 
the Light Which shone forth from thee in a manner surpassing understanding.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on 
the third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world!  
Glory..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Samaritan woman  
On coming to Samaria, O Savior, Thou almighty One, didst speak there 
with a woman and ask of her water, though for the Jews Thou hadst of old 
brought forth springs from a cloven rock. Thou didst bring her to faith in Thee, 
and now she doth ever enjoy eternal life in the heavens.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
Of the Crucifixion: Unto them that fear Thee, O Lord, * Thou hast given 
Thy precious Cross as an ensign, * O Lover of mankind, * whereby Thou hast 
triumphed over the dominions of darkness and its powers, * returning us to the 
ancient blessedness of our former state; * and for this cause, we glorify thine 
economy and love for mankind, * O my Jesus, Almighty Lord, ** the true 
Savior of our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: Unto them that fear Thee, O Lord ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
Of the Resurrection: O Christ the Savior, * with Thy Cross, guide us to Thy 
truth, * and deliver us from the snares of the enemy; * O Thou who art risen 
from the dead * raise us also who have fallen through sin, * by the stretching 
out of Thy hand, * O Lord, at the behest of the prayers of Thy Saints. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Martyricon: Precious is the death of Thy Saints, O Lord; * for shattered by 
sword and fire and frost, * they shed their blood, having placed their hope in 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thee, * that they might receive the reward of their labors. ** They endured and 
received great mercy from Thee, O Savior. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VI: 
The Well-spring of the principle of life, * Jesus, our Savior, came to the well 
of the Patriarch Jacob, * and sought water from a Samaritan woman * that He 
might drink thereof. * And when she addressed Him * and said that the Jews 
had no dealings with the Samaritans, * the wise Creator diverted her by the 
sweetness of His words, * so that she would seek from Him everlasting water, * 
which, when she received it, * she proclaimed to all, saying: * Come and see the 
Knower of things hidden, ** God Who is come in the flesh to save mankind.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
The Samaritan woman came to the well with a Water jar. * But instead of 
drawing water, she left the jar empty, * and hastening to the city, she cried that 
she had found the unfailing Spring * which welleth up with life. * Wherefore, 
she partook of the salvific water, ** refreshing her heart, which had grown faint 
from the passions’ heat. 
Verse: Bend Thy bow, and proceed prosperously, and be king, * because 
of truth and meekness and righteousness. 
Thou hast spoken the truth today, * that thou hast not a lawful spouse. * 
Thus said the Savior to the Samaritan woman. * For in the past thou hast had 
five husbands, * and he whom thou now hast is forbidden by the Law and not 
your spouse. * Whereupon She ran with haste and declared to those dwelling in 
the city: * I have seen a man ** who told me all of my hidden and secret deeds. 
Verse: Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity. * Wherefore 
God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness more than 
Thy fellows. 
The Samaritan woman drew forth a new and life-giving draught, * which 
flowed from the heavenly Well-spring, * which she happened upon beside the 
well, * from whence she drew the fleeting draught of earthly water. * And like a 
new wellspring, * welling forth in her heart, ** it bedewed the passions’ burning 
heat. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
When by Thine unfathomable dispensation Thou didst appear on earth, O 
Christ God, * the Samaritan woman, on hearing Thy words O lover of 
mankind, * left the water jar at the well and hastened to those in the city and 
said: * Come, behold One Who knoweth men’s hearts; ** mayhap He is the 
expected Christ, Who hath great mercy.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
 The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in 
an unconfused union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and 
through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from 
death. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Having learned the joyful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
THURSDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE VIII of the Canon. 
Thou wast willingly raised up on the Tree, O long-suffering One; the rocks 
were rent asunder, the sun was quenched, the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain, the earth was shaken, and Hades shuddered with fear and loosed all that 
were in bonds. (Twice) 
Thou didst appear unto them that sat in darkness, O Lord, since Thou art 
the unwaning Light and the Life of all. Wherefore, as the assembly of the 
righteous beheld Thee, O Word, they leaped for joy and cried out: Thou art 
come to loose all from their bonds; we praise Thy dominion. (Twice) 
Glory ..., We praise the Father Who is beginningless from before all time, 
the Son Who is co-beginningless, and the Holy Spirit, the Three Who are one 
God, un-commingled, undivided, the Creator of all, the self-determining 
dominion of one might, and we cry: O ye works of the Lord, unceasingly bless 
ye the Lord.  
 Both now ..., By a live coal was Isaiah cleansed, thereby proclaiming 
aforetime the noetic Ember Which was incarnate of thee in a manner 
surpassing comprehension, O Virgin, and Which burneth away all the substance 
of the sins of mortal men, and deifieth our nature in His compassion, O all-
immaculate One.  
At the Entrance, The Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Having come to the well in faith, * the Samaritan woman beheld Thee, the 
Water of Wisdom * whereof having drunk abundantly, she, the renowned one, 
** inherited the Kingdom on high forever.  
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
The Prokeimenon: O chant unto our God, chant ye; * chant unto 
our King, chant ye. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 15:5 - 34) 
In those days: there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which 
believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them 
to keep the law of Moses. And the apostles and elders came together for to 
consider of this matter. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose 
up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago 
God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the 
word of the gospel, and believe. And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare 
them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us; And put no 
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. Now therefore 
why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither 
our fathers nor we were able to bear? But we believe that through the grace of 
the LORD Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they. Then all the multitude 
kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles 
and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. And after they 
had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto 
me: Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take 
out of them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of the prophets; 
as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of 
David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will 
set it up: That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the 
Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these 
things. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. 
Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the 
Gentiles are turned to God: But that we write unto them, that they abstain from 
pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from 
blood. For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being 
read in the synagogues every Sabbath day. Then pleased it the apostles and 
elders with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to 
Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas and Silas, 
chief men among the brethren: And they wrote letters by them after this 
manner; The apostles and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren 
which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia. Forasmuch as we 
have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words, 
subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law: to 
whom we gave no such commandment: It seemed good unto us, being 
assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved 
Barnabas and Paul, Men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the 

--- PAGE 17 ---
same things by mouth. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay 
upon you no greater burden than these necessary things; That ye abstain from 
meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from 
fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well. So 
when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they had gathered 
the multitude together, they delivered the epistle: Which when they had read, 
they rejoiced for the consolation. And Judas and Silas, being prophets also 
themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them. And 
after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in peace from the brethren 
unto the apostles. Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still, Judas 
returned to Jerusalem. 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: Bend Thy bow, and proceed prosperously, and be king, because 
of truth and meekness and righteousness. 
Verse: Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (10:17 - 28) 
The Lord said unto the Jews who came unto Him: Therefore doth my 
Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man 
taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and 
I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father. 
There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings. And 
many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him? Others said, 
These are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of 
the blind? And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter. 
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon’s porch. Then came the Jews round 
about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou 
be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed 
not: the works that I do in my Father’s name, they bear witness of me. But ye 
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear 
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal 
life. 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
 
