--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 18th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
At the sixth hour the Well-spring of miracles * came to the well to capture 
the fruit of Eve, * for Eve at this same hour departed from Paradise * through 
the deceit of the serpent. * The Samaritan woman, therefore, drew nigh to draw 
water, * and the Savior, upon seeing her, said to her: * Give Me water to drink, 
and I shall fill thee with living water. * And running to the city, that prudent 
woman at once announced to the multitudes: ** Come, behold Christ the Lord, 
the Savior of our souls.  
In Tone II: When the compassionate Lord came unto the well, * the 
Samaritan woman entreated Him, saying: * Grant me the water of faith, * and I 
shall receive the waters of the font of baptism unto rejoicing and redemption. 
** O Giver of life, Lord, glory be to Thee.  
The co-beginningless and co-eternal Son and Word of the Father, * the 
Well-spring of healings, came to the well, * and a woman of Samaria came to 
draw water. * And when the Savior saw her, He said: * Give Me water to drink, 
and go, call thy husband. * But addressing Him as a man and not as God, * and 
being anxious to hide herself from Him, she said: I have no husband. * And the 
Teacher replied: Thou hast truly said, I have no husband; * for thou hast had 
five, and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband. * And she, amazed by 
these words, hastened to the city * and cried out unto the multitudes, saying: ** 
Come, behold Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy.  
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
By Jacob’s Well, Jesus found the Samaritan woman. * He that covereth the 
earth with clouds asked water of her. * O wonder! He that rideth on the 
cherubim speaketh with a harlot woman, * asking for water, * He Who hath 
suspended the earth upon the waters. * He Who causeth springs and pools of 
waters to flow forth seeketh water, * for He wished to draw to Himself her that 

--- PAGE 2 ---
was truly ensnared by the contending enemy, * and to impart the water of life 
unto her * who was sorely inflamed with unseemly deeds, ** for He alone is 
tenderly compassionate and the Lover of mankind. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion Dogmatic, in Tone IV: 
prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in psalmody unto Him 
Who hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God was well pleased 
without father to become a man from thee, * the Queen who standeth at His 
right hand, * and He - the source of life - showed thee to be His mother, * that 
He might renew His own image, corrupted by the passions. * Having found the 
lost sheep wandering on the mountain * He hath laid it upon His shoulders, * 
that He may bring it to his Father; * and in accordance with His own will * 
unite it to the heavenly powers * and thus, O Theotokos, save the world, ** 
Christ, Who is richly and abundantly merciful. 
 “O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise 
up against me redeem me. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone IV: 
Unceasingly worshiping Thy life-giving Cross, O Christ God, * we glorify 
Thy Resurrection on the third day, * for through it, O All-powerful one, * Thou 
hast renewed corrupted human nature * and shown us the way to heaven, ** 
since Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: The Lord is King, He is clothed with majesty; * the Lord is 
clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
By being willingly nailed to the tree of the Cross, O Savior, * Thou hast 
abolished the penalty of the tree of disobedience; * and by descending into 
Hades, O All-powerful one, * as God Thou hast torn asunder the bonds of 
death. * Wherefore we worship Thy Resurrection from the dead, and we cry out 
with joy: ** O all-powerful Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: For He established the world * which shall not be shaken. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Thou hast shattered the gates of Hades, O Lord, * and by Thy death Thou 
hast destroyed the dominion of death; * delivering mankind from corruption, * 
granting the world life, incorruption, ** and great mercy. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days. 
O Lord, by ascending the Cross * Thou hast wiped out our ancestral curse, * 
and by descending into Hades * Thou hast set free those enchained therein 
from all ages, * granting incorruption to mankind; * wherefore with hymns we 
glorify ** Thy life-giving and saving arising. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
When by Thine unfathomable dispensation Thou didst appear on earth, O 
Christ God, * the Samaritan woman, on hearing Thy words O Lover of 
mankind, * left the water jar at the well and hastened to those in the city and 
said: * Come, behold One Who knoweth men’s hearts; ** mayhap He is the 
expected Christ, Who hath great mercy.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Having learned the joyful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
SATURDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.”  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XVI) The following Sessional 
Hymns from the Oktoechos, in Tone IV: 
Looking into the entrance of the tomb, the myrrh-bearing women * were 
unable to endure the bright radiance of the angel, * trembling in awe they said; * 
“How is it that He who hath opened Paradise to the Thief hath been stolen? * 
How is it that He who before His passion proclaimed His arising hath been 
raised? ** Truly Christ God hath arisen, granting those in Hades life and 
resurrection.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
After the 2nd reading of the Psalter (Kath. XVII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Let the heavens be glad, let earthly things rejoice; * for from a Virgin, Christ 
God hath appeared as a man, * delivering from corruption all mankind by His 
death and wondrous arising. * The Samaritan woman having asked for water, 
was bestowed the source of healings, ** since He is the Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th Psalm. 
For the Canons: the Canon of The Samaritan woman with its Irmos to make 
eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. At the Third 
Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, Glory ..., Both 
now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the Samaritan woman. At the Sixth ODE the 
Kontakion and Ikos of Samaritan woman. At the Ninth Ode, the 
Exapostilarion of Pascha and the Samaritan woman. The Canon in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: O Thou Who smote Egypt and drowned the tyrant Pharaoh in the 
sea, * Thou didst save from slavery * the people who like Moses chanted 
a hymn of victory, * for He hath been glorified.  
He that was buried is risen, and hath thereby raised up with Himself the 
race of mankind. Let all creation rejoice, and let the noetic clouds today openly 
rain down righteousness.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Lord, Who supportest Thy chambers in the waters, since Thou art the 
Water of Life, Thou didst grant Thine honored waters unto the Samaritan 
woman who besought Thee, having learned of Thy compassion.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: O Thou Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, save those who glorify 
Thee with sincere faith, since Thou art the Creator of all, and grant unto us 
forgiveness of sins, inasmuch as Thou art supremely good. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Rejoice, O fiery throne; rejoice, O all-golden lampstand; 
rejoice, O cloud of light; rejoice, O palace of the Word and spiritual table, 
which did worthily bear Christ, the Bread of life. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: My heart hath been firmly established * in the Lord my God: * for 
by Him the weak have been girded * with strength. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 7 ---
An angel shining like lightning spake unto the myrrh-bearers: Why are ye 
astonished? Why do ye bring myrrh and seek the Master in the grave, O ye 
women? He is risen, and hath raised the world up with Himself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Since Thou art the Life and Well-spring of immortality, Thou didst sit 
down at the well, O compassionate One, and didst fill with Thy supremely wise 
waters the Samaritan woman who besought Thee and praised Thee.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: The Father, the Son, and the divine Spirit are praised as one 
God in Trinity over all, Whom the orders of the heavens glorify with fear as 
they cry out clearly: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou O Lord. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Having inexplicably conceived in thy womb the God of all, O 
Virgin Mother, thou didst give birth in a manner transcending mind and speech, 
and didst remain a virgin, even as thou wast before giving birth, O Bride of 
God. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Let heaven joyfully resound and exult now, * and let all things here upon 
earth dance in gladness; * for from a Virgin, Christ God hath appeared as a 
man. * By His death He hath redeemed mortal mankind from corruption. * By 
great signs He shone forth upon the Samaritan woman. * Requesting water, He 
bestowed on her the source of healings, ** since He is the Lover of mankind.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am in fear. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord. 
 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Christ died, thy dominion was swallowed up, O Death. At His 
arising the dead came forth from the graves as from bridal chambers.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
O Lord, Thou didst grant knowledge of Thy power unto the Samaritan 
woman who asked water of Thee; wherefore, she thirsteth not throughout the 
ages and doth praise Thee.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: O Father and Word and divine Spirit, O Trinity, transcendent 
in essence, co-beginningless and of one power: Save us all who faithfully praise 
Thee.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Of old the lawgiver beheld thee as an unburning bush, and 
Daniel perceived thee as a holy mountain, O only Lady and Virgin Mother. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Shine upon me, O Lord, * the light of Thy commandments, * for 
my soul riseth early to Thee and hymneth Thee: * For Thou art our God, 
* and unto Thee do I flee, O King of peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the myrrh-bearers reached Thy holy sepulcher early in the morning, 
they beheld a youth shining like lightning, and they were astonished on learning 
of Thy divine arising, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Since Thou art the Source of life, O Lord, Thou didst grant the water of 
forgiveness and knowledge unto the Samaritan woman who asked for it of old; 
wherefore, we praise Thine ineffable compassion.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: We reverence the Unity of three hypostases, the Trinity one in 
essence: Father, Word and Holy Spirit, one God undivided in nature, the 
Creator and Lord and Master of all.  
Theotokion: We call thee the impassable gate, the untilled land, the ark 
bearing the Manna, a vessel and lamp-stand and the censer of the immaterial 
Ember, O pure One.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Let not the watery tempest drown me, * nor the abyss destroy me; 
* for I have been cast into the heart of the deep of the sea. * Wherefore, 
like Jonah I cry aloud to Thee: * Raise up my life from the corruption of  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst mightily shatter the bars and gates of Hades and didst arise, 
since Thou art God, O Master. Upon meeting the women, Thou didst say unto 
them: Rejoice. And Thou didst send them to tell the disciples: He that liveth is 
risen and hath appeared, enlightening the ends of the earth.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Since Thou, O Lord, art a bounteous stream of life and an abyss of mercy, 
O good One, while journeying Thou didst sit down near the well of the oath 
and didst cry unto the Samaritan woman: Give Me water to drink, that thou 
mayest receive the waters of forgiveness.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: I faithfully praise the beginningless Father, and the Son Who is 
of one rank with Him and the Spirit Who is consubstantial with Them, even 
one Essence, and Nature, and Glory, and one Kingdom, the God and Creator 
of all, the Sustainer of all things, together with the bodiless powers.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us! 
Theotokion: We praise thee, for thou alone didst give birth as a virgin and 
didst keep thy womb incorrupt, O pure One, throne of the Lord, gate and 
mountain, noetic lamp, bridal chamber of God which art full of light, manifest 
tabernacle of glory, thou ark and vessel and table.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion of the Samaritan woman, in Tone VIII: 
Having come to the well in faith, * the Samaritan woman beheld Thee, the 
Water of Wisdom * whereof having drunk abundantly, she, the renowned one, 
** inherited the Kingdom on high forever.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ikos: Let us hear of the noble mysteries, as John teacheth us what cometh 
to pass in Samaria, how the Lord speaketh unto a woman, asking water of her, 
even He that gathered the waters into the places where they are gathered, and 
Who is of one throne with the Father and the Spirit; for He, the renowned One, 
came, seeking out His image forever.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Forsake us not to the end for Thy names sake, * for we have not 
forsaken Thy commandments, * and take not Thy mercy from us * O 
Lord God of our Fathers, * who art supremely hymned throughout the 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having descended with Thy soul into the lower reaches of Hades, all of 
those who were bound and whom death, the bitter tyrant, had held from all 
ages Thou didst courageously lead forth, as they cried unto Thee, O Christ 
God: Glory be to Thy dread dispensation.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou art the Water of Life, cried the Samaritan woman unto Christ. Give 
me to drink, therefore, who always thirst for Thy divine grace, O Word, that I 
may no longer be held by the drought of ignorance, but may proclaim Thy 
mighty acts, O Lord Jesus.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: We praise the Father and the Son and the divine Spirit, the 
Trinity undivided in nature and divided in Hypostases, one Essence naturally 
united, the beginningless Creator and God of all, Whom all the orders of the 
heavens praise.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: After an awesome childbirth thou wast preserved a pure Virgin, 
O holy Theotokos. Wherefore, with unceasing voices all the choirs of angels 
and all the generations of men praise thee, the pure vessel of the Uncontainable 
One.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In wisdom hast Thou fashioned all things, O Master, * Thou 
didst establish the earth firmly upon the fathomless depths of the waters, 
* in accordance with Thy knowledge, * wherefore we hymn Thee 
chanting: * Unceasingly bless ye the Lord all ye works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou wast willingly raised up on the Tree, O long-suffering One; the rocks 
were rent asunder, the sun was quenched, the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain, the earth was shaken, and Hades shuddered with fear and loosed all that 
were in bonds.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Thou didst appear unto them that sat in darkness, O Lord, since Thou art 
the unwaning Light and the Life of all. Wherefore, as the assembly of the 
righteous beheld Thee, O Word, they leaped for joy and cried out: Thou art 
come to loose all from their bonds; we praise Thy dominion.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: We praise the Father Who is beginningless from before all time, 
the Son Who is co-beginningless, and the Holy Spirit, the Three Who are one 
God, un-commingled, undivided, the Creator of all, the self-determining 
dominion of one might, and we cry: O ye works of the Lord, unceasingly bless 
ye the Lord.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: By a live coal was Isaiah cleansed, thereby proclaiming 
aforetime the noetic Ember Which was incarnate of thee in a manner 
surpassing comprehension, O Virgin, and Which burneth away all the substance 
of the sins of mortal men, and deifieth our nature in His compassion, O all-
imaculate One.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE IX 
Irmos: The God of Israel hath shown strength with His arm, * for He 
hath put down the mighty from their thrones, * and exalted them of low 
degree * The daystar from on high Who hath visited us, * and firmly 
established us on the path of peace.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Having destroyed the tyranny of death, O Christ, Thou camest forth from 
the grave like a comely bridegroom coming forth from a bridal chamber. Thou 
didst shatter the bars of Hades by divine might, and Thou didst illumine the 
world with the noetic light of Thine arising.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee. 
Let us all now form spiritual choirs and cry: The Lord is risen; let the earth 
rejoice, let heaven be glad, let the clouds drop down the rain of righteousness 
upon us who celebrate radiantly and praise Christ.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee!  
Trinitarion: The Unity of threefold splendor, even the beginningless Father, 
Son and Spirit, is one Godhead, the Life and Creator of all, one indivisible 
Light. Together with the Bodiless let us praise Him with thrice-holy songs as we 
speak of things sacred, O ye faithful.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us!  
Theotokion: Since thou art become a dwelling-place of the Light, O pure 
One, illumine thou the eyes of my soul, which have been darkened through the 
many devices of the enemy, and grant that with a pure heart I may see clearly 
the Light Which shone forth from thee in a manner surpassing understanding.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on the 
third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world!  
Glory..., Both now ..., Exapostilarion of the Samaritan woman:  
On coming to Samaria, O Savior, Thou almighty One, didst speak there 
with a woman and ask of her water, though for the Jews Thou hadst of old 
brought forth springs from a cloven rock. Thou didst bring her to faith in Thee, 
and now she doth ever enjoy eternal life in the heavens.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
O all-powerful Lord, * Who didst endure the Cross and death, * and arose 
from the dead, ** we glorify Thy Holy Resurrection. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
By Thy Cross, O Christ, Thou hast delivered us from the ancient curse, * 
and by Thy death Thou hast conquered the devil who tyrannized our nature. * 
By Thine arising Thou hast filled all things with joy, * wherefore we cry unto 
Thee: ** “O Lord risen from the dead, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
O Christ the Savior, * with Thy Cross, guide us to Thy truth, * and deliver 
us from the snares of the enemy; * O Thou who art risen from the dead * raise 
us also who have fallen through sin, * by the stretching out of Thy hand, * O 
Lord, at the behest of the prayers of Thy Saints. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Without departing from Thy Father’s bosom, * in Thy tender compassion, 
Thou didst descend to earth, * O Only-begotten Word of God, * without 
change becoming man. * Whilst Thou art impassible in Thy divinity, * Thou 
didst suffer the Cross and death in the flesh; * and rising from the dead Thou 
hast granted immortality to the race of mankind, ** as Thou alone art All-
powerful. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VI: 
The Well-spring of the principle of life, * Jesus, our Savior, came to the well 
of the Patriarch Jacob, * and sought water from a Samaritan woman * that He 
might drink thereof. * And when she addressed Him * and said that the Jews 
had no dealings with the Samaritans, * the wise Creator diverted her by the 
sweetness of His words, * so that she would seek from Him everlasting water, * 
which, when she received it, * she proclaimed to all, saying: * Come and see the 
Knower of things hidden, ** God Who is come in the flesh to save mankind.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV : 
Having seen seated at the well the ever-flowing Well-spring, * she who 
burned with numerous passions, * sought to receive for herself the living water 
which doth flow from Him like a spring, * which she freely obtained from the 
Word. * And no longer doth she need to hasten * and draw that water from the 
well there, ** which is earthen and perisheth. 
Verse: Bend Thy bow, and proceed prosperously, and be king, * because 
of truth and meekness and righteousness. 
The woman rejected those things which the Jews observed, * setting forth 
the lack of relations between them; * then Christ, the wise Creator, * by His 
sweet words diverted her * by granting her to drink of the divine life-giving 
water. * And when she had partaken thereof, * she hastened to those who dwelt 
in the city ** and informed them of what had come to pass. 
Verse: Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity. Wherefore 
God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee * with the oil of gladness more than 
Thy fellows. 
Thou dost not have a bucket, * and the well is exceeding deep. * From 
whence then shalt Thou give me this immortal water? * Thus said the Samaritan 
woman to Thee as to a mortal man, * not knowing that Thou art God, * she 
marveled at what was spoken by Thee. * But by having her partake of Thy 
sweet words, * Thou didst prepare her to confess Thee ** to be the God of all 
creation.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Thus saith the Lord unto the woman of Samaria: * If thou knewest the gift 
of God, * and Who it is that saith to thee: * Give Me water to drink, * thou 
wouldst have asked Him, * and He would have given unto thee to drink, ** that 
thou mightest never thirst unto eternity, saith the Lord.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” 
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Having learned the joyful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
SATURDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica. At the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IX of the Canon. 
Having destroyed the tyranny of death, O Christ, Thou camest forth from 
the grave like a comely bridegroom coming forth from a bridal chamber. Thou 
didst shatter the bars of Hades by divine might, and Thou didst illumine the 
world with the noetic light of Thine arising. (Twice) 
Let us all now form spiritual choirs and cry: The Lord is risen; let the earth 
rejoice, let heaven be glad, let the clouds drop down the rain of righteousness 
upon us who celebrate radiantly and praise Christ. (Twice) 
Trinitarion: The Unity of threefold splendor, even the beginningless Father, 
Son and Spirit, is one Godhead, the Life and Creator of all, one indivisible 
Light. Together with the Bodiless let us praise Him with thrice-holy songs as we 
speak of things sacred, O ye faithful.  
Theotokion: Since thou art become a dwelling-place of the Light, O pure 
One, illumine thou the eyes of my soul, which have been darkened through the 
many devices of the enemy, and grant that with a pure heart I may see clearly 
the Light Which shone forth from thee in a manner surpassing understanding.  
At the Entrance, The Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Having learned the joyful proclamation of the Resurrection from the angel, 
* and having cast off the ancestral condemnation, * the women disciples of the 
Lord spake exultantly to the apostles: * “Death is despoiled and Christ God is 
risen, ** granting the world great mercy.” 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Having come to the well in faith, * the Samaritan woman beheld Thee, the 
Water of Wisdom * whereof having drunk abundantly, she, the renowned one, 
** inherited the Kingdom on high forever.  
 
The Prokeimenon: 
The Prokeimenon in Tone III: O chant unto our God, chant ye; * chant 
unto our King, chant ye. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 15:35 - 41) 
In those days: Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and 
preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also. And some days after 
Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city 
where we have preached the word of the LORD, and see how they do. And 
Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark. But 
Paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed from them from 
Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work. And the contention was so 
sharp between them, that they departed asunder one from the other: and so 
Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus; And Paul chose Silas, and 
departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God. And he 
went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches. 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Bend Thy bow, and proceed prosperously, and be king, because 
of truth and meekness and righteousness. 
Verse: Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (10:27 - 38) 
The Lord said unto the Jews who came unto Him: My sheep hear my voice, 
and I know them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life; and 
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My 
Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck 
them out of my Father’s hand. I and my Father are one. Then the Jews took up 
stones again to stone him. Jesus answered them, Many good works have I 
shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me? The 
Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for 
blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. Jesus 
answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he called 
them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be 
broken; Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the 
world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God? If I do not the 
works of my Father, believe me not. But if I do, though ye believe not me, 
believe the works: that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I 
in him. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
 
