--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. No Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone V: 
Thou art the light of all mankind, * the fashioner of the eyes of our mortal 
flesh, * O God and Word, Thou Creator of all things. * And now by the 
mixture of spittle and clay, * Thou in a manner beyond telling hast granted sight 
to a man who was born blind, * Thou Who with Thy fingers didst fashion both 
dust and sight. * And when he who had never seen the sun received sight, * he 
beheld Thee, the sweet Sun, * and saw the image of Him Who ineffably 
fashioned us ** in accordance with His compassionate mercy. 
Having, as an abundance of Wealth, * the form and members which 
comprise our mortal flesh, * the man who came forth blind from his mother’s 
womb * could not fathom what the form of this world could be; * for he lacked 
eyes. * And because of this his feet and his body * were pained by frequent 
stumbling against stones. * Yet through Thee he gained that wealth he did not 
have, * and he beheld Thee, the Author of lights, * the only Light of the world, 
* and he proclaimed unto all * that Thou art God and the Lord of creation, ** 
and the fashioner of all things in the world. 
He who in times past had been blind * confessed with his whole soul, mind 
and tongue, * the One Who had fashioned eyes for him out of spittle and clay, * 
granting him to see, * preached that He is the Lord and Creator of all things, * 
Who out of compassion for that which He had fashioned, * became a man, 
though He is God almighty. * The scribes could not bear to hear his words and 
see his zeal, * and in their jealousy they expelled him from the synagogue, * for 
the blindness which consumed their souls ** surpassed that which once 
consumed his eyes. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
He that was born blind thought to himself and said: * Was I born without 
eyes for the sins of my parents? * Was I born to be an example because of the 
unbelief of the nations? * I cease not from asking: When is it night, when is it 
day? * My feet cannot endure striking against the stones. * For I have neither 
seen the sun shining nor beheld in image Him Who fashioned me. * But I 
beseech Thee, O Christ God, ** look upon me and have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:  
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the 
Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house 
of our God. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone V: 
By Thy precious Cross, O Christ, * Thou hast shamed the devil, * and by 
Thy Resurrection Thou hast blunted the sting of sin, * and saved us from the 
gates of death: ** we glorify Thee, the Only-begotten One.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
A Hymn Of Compunction: O Lord, I cease not from sinning; * even though 
I have been deemed worthy of Thy love for mankind, * I have not 
acknowledged it. * Do Thou Overcome my hardness of heart, * O only good 
One, ** and have mercy on me. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: Having disdained all earthly things, * and having courageously 
endured torments, * ye did not fall short of your blessed hopes, * but ye became 
heirs of the Kingdom of the heavens, * O all-famed martyrs. * Since ye have 
boldness before God the Lover of mankind, * pray that peace be granted unto 
the world, ** and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
As Jesus passed by on His way from the temple, * He found a man who was 
blind from his birth; * and taking compassion on him, He put clay on his eyes 
and said unto him: * Go and wash in the pool of Siloam. * And he washed and 
gained his sight, and sent up praise to God. * But his kinsmen said unto him: * 
Who hath opened thine eyes, which none of those who see were able to heal? * 

--- PAGE 3 ---
And he cried out and said: * A man called Jesus; He told me: Wash in the pool 
of Siloam; and I gained my sight. * He is truly Christ the Messiah, of Whom 
Moses spake in the Law. ** He is the Savior of our souls.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * 
and who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * 
Cease not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let us, O faithful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * 
and who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * 
Cease not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. IV) The following Sessional Hymns 
from the Oktoechos, in Tone V: 
Let us celebrate the Cross of the Lord, * let us honor His holy Burial with 
hymns, * and let us exulting, glorify His Resurrection. * For with Himself He 
hath raised the dead from their graves, * and as God having despoiled the 
dominion of death * and the might of the devil, ** He hath shone forth light 
upon those in Hades. 
Verse: O Lord condemn me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
A Hymn of Compunction: Let us all keep vigil * and meet Christ with an 
abundance of oil and radiant lamps, * O ye faithful, * that we be deemed 
worthy to enter within the bridal chamber, * for she that was found outside the 
door * cried unto God to no avail: ** Have mercy upon me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: Zealously striving after the cup of Thy Passion, O Lord, * Thy 
passion-bearers forsook the delight of life * and became companions of the 
angels. * By their supplications, O Christ God, ** grant unto our souls peace 
and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou who art of heaven with the angels * and of 
the earth with mankind, * we cry out to thee with a call of joy: * Rejoice, gate 
wider than the heavens! * Rejoice, thou who alone art the salvation of those 
born on earth! * Rejoice, O pure one, full of grace, ** who hast given birth unto 
God incarnate.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. V) Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Before Thy Cross and arising, O Merciful One, * the man blind from birth 
called with fervor to Thee: * Have mercy on me; O Son of David, * and grant 
me sight that I may look upon Thee. * Thus with Thy hand, O Word of God 
and Redeemer of the world, * didst Thou make clay with Thy spittle, * and 
therewith didst anoint him, ** brightly granting light unto him.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th 
Psalm. For the Canons: the Canon of The Blind man with its Irmos to make 
eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. At the Third 
Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, Glory ..., Both 
now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the Blind man. At the Sixth ODE the Kontakion 
and Ikos of the Blind man. At the Ninth Ode, the Exapostilarion of Pascha and 
the Blind man. The Canon in Tone V: 
ODE I 
Irmos: A land which the sun had never beheld, * and upon which it had 
never shined, * an abyss which the vault of heaven had not seen laid bare, 
* hath Israel traversed dry-shod, O Lord. * And Thou didst lead them to 
Thy mountain of sanctification, * as they sang and chanted * a hymn of 
victory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having accepted a voluntary crucifixion in the flesh, Thou didst pour forth 
blessing and life unto the world, O only most blessed Master and Creator of all. 
Wherefore we bless and praise and glorify Thee, singing and chanting a hymn of 
victory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou hadst died, O Christ, the noble Joseph laid Thee in a hollow, 
even the lowest pit, and he rolled a stone against the entrance of the sepulcher, 
O Long-suffering One. But Thou didst arise in glory and didst raise up the 
world together with Thyself, as it sang and chanted a hymn of victory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Why bring ye myrrh with tears? said the angel who appeared unto the 
venerable women. Christ is risen. Make haste and tell it to the disciples, those 
seers of God who are lamenting and weeping, so that they may radiantly leap 
and dance for joy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The Redeemer performed strange wonders, in that He healed the man who 
had been blind from birth. He anointed him with clay and said: Go and wash in 
Siloam, that thou mightest know that I am God, Who by the bowels of My 
compassion walk upon the earth while bearing flesh.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: As we venerate one essence in three hypostases, O ye faithful, 
let us glorify the Father, and Son, and Upright Spirit, the Creator and Lord and 
Redeemer of all, one uncreated God, and let us cry out with the Bodiless: Holy, 
Holy, Holy art Thou, O King. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Out of compassion, the Lord dwelt in thy womb, which knew 
not wedlock, O pure one, for He wished to save mankind who, through the 
devices of the enemy, had become subject to corruption. Entreat Him, 
therefore, that this city be saved from every enemy assault and conquest. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: Do Thou establish my heart, O Lord, * which is shaken by the 
billows of life, * and guide it to a calm haven, O God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst make steadfast the hearts of those who were shaken when Thou 
didst make the earth to shake at Thy venerated crucifixion, to which Thou didst 
submit in the flesh, O Long-suffering One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The noble Joseph laid Thee in a new tomb, O compassionate One. But 
Thou didst arise from the dead on the third day, thereby renewing us.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Why seek ye the Lord as though He were dead? He is risen as He said, 
proclaimed the angel unto the women, as he flashed forth with radiant divinity.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst heal the man who was blind from birth, who of old came unto 
Thee and glorified Thy dispensation and Thy wonders, O All-compassionate 
One.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: We worship God the Father, the Son Who is beginningless from 
before all time, and the divine Spirit, the threefold uncreated nature in three 
Hypostases, the one God of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: From thy virginal womb thou didst give birth unto God 
incarnate. Do thou beseech Him, O all-holy Lady, that He have compassion 
upon us. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
The Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
As the Master and Fashioner of all things passed by, * He encountered along 
the way a blind man who was seated there * and who mourned aloud, saying: * 
All my life I have beheld neither the sun shining forth * nor laid eyes on the 
bright luminescence of the moon. * Yet since Thou wast born of an immaculate 
Virgin so as to fill all with light, * do Thou now fill me with Thy light, in that 
Thou art compassionate. * And thus I shall adore Thee and cry: * Sovereign 
Master, Christ my God, forgive me my sins, ** in Thine abundant compassion, 
O Thou only Lover of mankind.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard Thy report, O Lord, * and I was afraid. * I came to 
knowledge of Thy dispensation, * and I glorified Thee, * O only Lover of 
mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
When Thou Who art Life wast hung upon the Tree, by Thy great mercy 
Thou didst quicken me who had died because of the tree. For this cause I 
glorify Thee, O Word.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Dwelling together with Thine initiates in a wondrous manner, O Lord, Thou 
didst say unto them: Go, proclaim everywhere My Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst confirm Thine arising from the grave, O Lord, when Thou didst 
abide for many days with those who loved Thee, thereby causing them to 
rejoice, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst give eyes unto the man who had been blind from the 
womb, Thou didst say: Go, wash and receive thy sight, and glorify My Divinity.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: O beginningless Trinity, one in honour, undivided in essence, 
divided in hypostases, save all those who glorify Thee with faith and fear. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We glorify thy childbirth which is above nature, O immaculate 
One, and with faith we bless thee as the Birthgiver of the God of all, O most 
immaculate One. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Hasten Thou and have compassion on my wretched soul, * which 
doth battle at night * with the darkness of the passions. * Shine in me 
with the brightness of the day, * O noetic Sun, * and thereby make the 
night give way to light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast lifted up upon a Tree and didst exalt all mortal men together 
with Thyself. Thou didst both slay the hostile serpent and give life to the work 
of Thy hands, O compassionate One, since Thou alone art the God of all.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 Thou Who didst willingly die wast laid in a tomb, and Thou didst empty all 
the domains of Hades, O Immortal King, raising up the dead by Thy 
Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though Thou hadst wrought wondrous miracles upon the earth, a lawless 
people put Thee to death, O Word. But since Thou Thyself alone art mighty, O 
Lord, Thou didst arise from the dead, even as Thou didst foretell, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst open the eyes of him who could not see perceptible light, 
Thou didst enlighten the eyes of his soul as well. Thou didst move him to 
glorify Thee, for he had come to know Thee as the Creator, Who out of 
compassion didst appear as a mortal man.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: O ye faithful, let us all glorify the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity 
in Trinity, the Father, Son, and Upright Spirit, one God, Who is truly the 
Creator of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: How didst thou give birth without wedlock, O pure Virgin 
Mother, full of Grace? How dost thou nourish Him that nourisheth creation? It 
is as He alone knoweth, for He is the Creator and God of all. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Even as Thou didst deliver the prophet from the beast, O Lord, * 
so do Thou lead me up from the depths * of unrestrained passions, I pray 
Thee, * that I may dare * to look upon Thy holy temple. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Master, Who wast crucified with thieves, Thou didst deliver from crafty 
thieves and soul-corrupting passions all those who with one accord praise Thy 
crucifixion and arising, O man-befriending Lord.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 10 ---
In a sepulcher they laid Thee dead and without breath, O Christ, Who dost 
breathe life into all the dead. But Thou didst arise, O Lord, emptying all the 
tombs by Thy divine might, O Word.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
After Thine arising, O Christ, Thou didst say unto Thy friends: Tarry ye in 
Jerusalem, until ye be endued with invincible power and sure assistance from on 
high.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst make clay and didst anoint the eyes of the man who had been 
blind from his birth. Thou didst grant him his sight, and he praised Thine 
immaculate might, whereby Thou hast saved the world, O Word. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: O Unity of three Hypostases, Unbegotten Father, Begotten Son, 
and Thou Spirit Who proceedest, thrice-holy Lord, one essence and might, save 
all Thy people. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Who can tell of thy mighty deeds, O pure One? For, in a 
manner surpassing nature, thou didst give birth in the flesh unto God, Who 
through thee doth deliver the world from all sin, O all-immaculate Virgin. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion, of the Blind Man, in Tone IV: 
Since my soul’s noetic eyes are blind and sightless, * I have come to Thee, O 
Christ, * as did the man who was blind from birth. * And in repentance I cry 
unto Thee: ** Of those in darkness Thou art the most radiant Light.  
Ikos: Grant me a stream of ineffable wisdom and knowledge from on high, 
O Christ, Thou Light of them that are in darkness and Guide of all those who 
are gone astray, that I may tell of those things that the divine book of the 
Gospel of peace hath taught, to wit, the miracle that was wrought upon the 
blind man; for though blind from birth, he receiveth the physical eyes as well as 
the eyes of the soul, as he crieth out in faith: Of those in darkness art Thou the 
most radiant Light.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: The prayer of the children quenched the fire * and the furnace 
which bedewed them proclaimed the miracle, * for it neither burned nor 
consumed them, * that chanted hymns unto the God of our Fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou was hung upon the Tree, O Savior, the sun was quenched, the 
earth was tossed like waves in a tempest, all creation was shaken, and the dead 
arose from the graves.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst rise from the dead, O King, the souls that were sleeping 
there were raised together with Thee; and they glorify Thy might, whereby the 
bonds of death have been dissolved.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The choir of women came at dawn to anoint Thee. But on learning that 
Thou hadst arisen, O Lord, they rejoiced together with the sacred disciples. 
Through them do Thou grant us the forgiveness of the evil deeds we have 
done.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst anoint the eyes of the blind man with clay and didst command 
him to go to Siloam. When he had washed, he received his sight and chanted 
hymns of praise to Thee, O Christ, Thou King of all.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: Let us praise the beginningless Father, the co-beginningless Son, 
and the all-holy Spirit. Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O God, Thou King of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou was seen to be a Virgin after giving birth, O pure One; 
for thou didst bear God, Who by His might renewed every nature, O most pure 
One. Do thou ever beseech Him that we be saved. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: O ye company of angels, * and assembly of mankind; * ye priests, 
Levites, and peoples: * praise, bless, and supremely exalt the King and 
Creator of all, * throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the orders of the angels beheld Thee hanging upon the Cross and all 
creation being changed out of fear, O Christ, Thou King of all, they stood in 
awe and praised Thy love for mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Upon seeing Thee below, Hades groaned and made haste to surrender the 
dead, whom he had guarded there from all ages, O Christ, and they chanted 
hymns in praise of Thy love for mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst accomplish awesome and wondrous things when of Thine own 
will Thou wast raised up upon the Cross, O Christ. Thou Who didst put Hades 
to death didst become one with the dead and courageously released all who 
were chained therein.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou gavest eyes unto the blind man who came unto Thee, O Christ. Thou 
didst command him to wash at the spring of Siloam and thus gain his sight, and 
proclaim Thee as God, Who hath appeared in the flesh for the salvation of the 
world.  
Refrain: Let us bless Father, Son, Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
Trinitarion: O undivided Trinity, uncommingled Unity, God of all and 
Creator of all, save from all manner of temptations those who faithfully praise 
and worship Thy dominion.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O immaculate Virgin, full of Grace, ever beseech thy Son that 
He put me not to shame in the day of judgment, but that He number me with 
His chosen flock. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: For the mighty One hath done great things to thee, * in that He 
showed thee forth as a pure Virgin * even after giving birth, * since thou 
art she that hath seedlessly borne her own creator, * wherefore, O 
Theotokos, * we magnify thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast affixed upon the Cross, O Christ God, and didst triumph over all 
the opposing powers of the enemy, and didst do away with the former curse, O 
Savior. Wherefore, as is meet, we magnify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Hades beheld Thee below with Thy soul, O Word, he groaned, and 
out of fear, set loose all the dead, who acknowledged the power of Thine 
authority; with them, as is due, we magnify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the assembly of the Hebrews beheld Him performing signs and 
wondrous miracles, they put Him to death out of malice; yet it was He Who 
despoiled Hades by His Resurrection and Who, as He is mighty, raised up all 
mankind together with Himself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst arise from the dead as Thou didst say, and didst appear unto 
Thy holy disciples after Thine arising, O Thou Giver of life, Who hath wrought 
signs and granted eyes to the blind. With them we magnify Thee throughout the 
ages.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: I reverence the Father as Light, I glorify the Son as Light, and I 
praise the Upright Spirit as Light: One undivided Light, perceived in three 
Hypostases, the God and King of all creation. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou wast seen to be more spacious than the heavens, O pure 
Virgin, when in bodily fashion thou didst contain God, the uncircumscribable 
One, and didst give birth unto Him for the redemption of all who praise thee 
with undoubting faith.  
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on 
the third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Blind Man:  
Enlighten my noetic eyes which are bereft of sight, O Lord, because of 
sin’s gloomy darkness. And since Thou art compassionate, instill in me humility. 
Cleanse Thou me by the tears of repentance and change of heart.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone V: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
O Lord, while the grave was sealed by lawless men, * Thou didst come forth 
from the tomb * in a manner similar to Thy birth from the Theotokos. * Thy 
bodiless angels could not fathom the event of Thine incarnation, * likewise the 
soldiers guarding Thee could not know when Thou didst arise. * For the full 
knowledge of both events hath been sealed from those who would inquire, * 
but the wonder of these events hath been revealed to those who with faith * 
worship the mystery which we hymn; ** grant unto us joy and great mercy. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: O Lord, while the grave was sealed ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
A Hymn of Compunction: Woe is me! how I have become like unto the 
barren fig tree, * and I fear the curse, and also being cut down. * But, O Christ 
God, Thou heavenly Husbandman, * show forth my hardened soul as fruitful, * 
and receive me as Thou didst the prodigal son, ** and have mercy on me. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Martyricon: Blessed is the army of the King of the heavens; * for though the 
passion-bearers were born of the earth, * yet they eagerly struggled to attain to 
the angelic rank * by disdaining their bodies; * and through their sufferings, 
were counted worthy * of the honor of the bodiless hosts. * By their prayers, O 
Lord, ** send down upon us Thy great mercy. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone II: 
The blind man, accounting all his life as though it were night, * cried unto 
Thee, O Lord: * Open mine eyes, O our Savior, * Thou Son of David, * that 
together with all mankind, ** I also may praise Thy power.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Blindness hath befallen those who could see, * and their minds and soul 
became darkened, * for having beheld the blind man regain sight, * in their 
wickedness they demanded of him: * “How dost thou now see like those who 
have sight? * For thou wast blind from Thy birth, * and thou didst sit by the 
wayside, begging.” * Thereupon, the blind man revealed that it was He Who 
had bestowed light, * and created the world’s luminaries, * thereby preaching 
God’s pre-beginningless Son, * Who in His compassion hath appeared as a man 
in these latter days, ** incarnate of the Spirit and the Virgin. 
Verse: Look upon me, * and have mercy upon me. 
Like unto one bearing a great burden and earthen load, * the blind man 
wandered in this world, * striking his feet against the stones. * Instead of sight 
he was endowed with a staff; * wherefore he fled for refuge unto the Light-
bestower. * from Whom he was granted to see the light, * and behold the 
Creator with his own eyes, * Him Who fashioned from the earth * our human 
nature in His own image and likeness, * but now from spittle mixed with dust * 
He hath enlightened the blind man’s eyes, * and in His love for mankind ** 
hath granted him to see the sun. 
Verse: My steps do Thou direct * according to Thy saying. 
When he beheld the light, * the blind man saw the Word of the Father, * 
Who had formed mankind in His image and likeness. * The wondrous vision 
filled him with gladness, * beholding the sun which ruleth the day, * brilliant 
and effulgent, as it is seen by all mankind, * and walking free from all stumbling, 
he traversed paths with ease, * and he recognized Him that had enlightened him 
as the Son of God, * Who had become a man out of His extreme compassion. * 
For, being God, He took upon Himself that which He was not, * remaining 
God yet also a man. ** preserving His uncommingled union. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Passing by on the way, O Lord, * Thou didst find a man who was blind 
from his birth. * And the disciples, in astonishment, asked Thee and said: * 
Teacher, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind? * And 
Thou, O my Savior, didst cry unto them: Neither hath this man sinned, nor his 
parents, * but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. * I must 
work the works of Him that sent Me, which none else can work. * And when 
Thou hadst said this, Thou didst spit upon the ground * and make clay, and 
anoint his eyes, saying unto him: * Go, wash in the pool of Siloam. * And he 
washed and was made whole and cried unto Thee: * Lord, I believe; and he 
worshipped Thee. ** Wherefore, we also cry out: Have mercy upon us.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * 
and who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * 
Cease not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let us, O faithful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
MONDAY OF THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE I of the Canon. 
Having accepted a voluntary crucifixion in the flesh, Thou didst pour forth 
blessing and life unto the world, O only all-blessed Master and Creator of all. 
Wherefore we bless and praise and glorify Thee, singing and chanting a hymn of 
victory.  
When Thou hadst died, O Christ, the noble Joseph laid Thee in a hollow, 
even the lowest pit, and he rolled a stone against the entrance of the sepulcher, 
O Long-suffering One. But Thou didst arise in glory and didst raise up the 
world together with Thyself, as it sang and chanted a hymn of victory.  
Why bring ye myrrh with tears? said the angel who appeared unto the 
venerable women. Christ is risen. Make haste and tell it to the disciples, those 
seers of God who are lamenting and weeping, so that they may radiantly leap 
and dance for joy.  
The Redeemer performed strange wonders, in that He healed the man who 
had been blind from birth. He anointed him with clay and said: Go and wash in 
Siloam, that thou mightest know that I am God, Who by the bowels of My 
compassion walk upon the earth while bearing flesh.  
Glory ..., As we venerate one essence in three hypostases, O ye faithful, let 
us glorify the Father, and Son, and Upright Spirit, the Creator and Lord and 
Redeemer of all, one uncreated God, and let us cry out with the Bodiless: Holy, 
Holy, Holy art Thou, O King.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: Out of compassion, the Lord dwelt in thy womb, 
which knew not wedlock, O pure one, for He wished to save man who, through 
the devices of the enemy, had become subject to corruption. Entreat Him, 
therefore, that this city be saved from every enemy assault and conquest.  
At the Entrance The Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Blind Man, in Tone IV: 
Since my soul’s noetic eyes are blind and sightless, * I have come to Thee, O 
Christ, * as did the man who was blind from birth. * And in repentance I cry 
unto Thee: ** Of those in darkness Thou art the most radiant Light.  
The Prokeimenon in Tone VIII: 
The Prokeimenon: Make your vows and pay them * to the Lord 
our God. 
Verse: In Judea is God known, His name is great in Israel. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 17:1 - 15) 
In those days: when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, 
they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews: And Paul, as his 
manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out 
of the scriptures, Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, 
and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is 
Christ. And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of 
the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few. But the 
Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows 
of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and 
assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people. And 
when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers 
of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come 
hither also; Whom Jason hath received: and these all do contrary to the decrees 
of Caesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus. And they troubled the 
people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things. And when they 
had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go. And the 
brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea: who coming 
thither went into the synagogue of the Jews. These were more noble than those 
in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and 
searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many of 
them believed; also of honorable women which were Greeks, and of men, not a 
few. But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God 
was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people. 
And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea: 
but Silas and Timotheus abode there still. And they that conducted Paul 
brought him unto Athens: and receiving a commandment unto Silas and 
Timotheus for to come to him with all speed, they departed. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Look upon me and have mercy on me. 
Verse: My steps do Thou direct according to Thy saying. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (11:47 - 57) 
At that time: there gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and 
said, What do we? for this man doeth many miracles. If we let him thus alone, 
all men will believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our 
place and nation. And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest that 
same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, Nor consider that it is 
expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole 
nation perish not. And this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that 
year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; And not for that 
nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God 
that were scattered abroad. Then from that day forth they took counsel together 
for to put him to death. Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the 
Jews; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called 
Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples. And the Jews’ passover was 
nigh at hand: and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the 
passover, to purify themselves. Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among 
themselves, as they stood in the temple, What think ye, that he will not come to 
the feast? Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a 
commandment, that, if any man knew where he were, he should shew it, that 
they might take him. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality.  
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
 
