--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning. The 6th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone V: 
He who in times past had been blind * confessed with his whole soul, mind 
and tongue, * the One Who had fashioned eyes for him out of spittle and clay, * 
granting him to see, * preaching that He is the Lord and Creator of all things, * 
Who out of compassion for that which He had fashioned, * became a man, 
though He is God almighty. * The scribes could not bear to hear his words and 
see his zeal, * and in their jealousy they expelled him from the synagogue, * for 
the blindness which consumed their souls ** surpassed that which once 
consumed his eyes. 
The man who had been blind * brought to them that have sight a trophy of 
excellence, * for he recognized his Maker and the Creator of all, * seeing Him 
Who by His spittle granted him sight. * By means of this single deed, he knew 
the One Who had enlightened him, * was the Son of God and the Lord of all 
the world. * But when they who were blinded by jealousy, * beheld Him they 
did not recognize Him, * though He had done many wondrous marvels, ** 
which He wrought gloriously by a single word. 
The truly blind scribes, looked upon the blind man with suspicion, * for 
they imagined that he had feigned not seeing, * in pretense showing the Savior 
to have given him sight. * They willingly were blinded by the dark letter of the 
Law * wherein shineth the truly resplendent Sun, * Who hath for my sake 
established the Sabbath rest, * having made bright the gloominess of the Law; * 
He took that light from them, and shed it upon those who were once blind. * 
and now beholding him, ** they proclaim the light-bestower to all the world. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Christ God, Thou noetic Sun of Righteousness, * Who by Thy most pure 
touch * didst bestow a twofold enlightenment * upon him who was blind from 
his mother’s womb, * do Thou also illumine the eyes of our souls, * and show 
us to be sons of the day, * that we may cry out to Thee with faith: * Great and 
ineffable is Thy compassion toward us, ** O Lover of mankind glory be to 
Thee. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou 
didst hearken unto me. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone V: 
He who hath granted Resurrection to mankind, * was led as a sheep to the 
slaughter; * the princes of Hades trembled before Him * and the gates of 
lamentations were lifted up; * for Christ the King of glory entered therein, * 
saying to those in bondage: “Come forth!” ** and to those in darkness: “Reveal 
yourselves!” 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
A Hymn of Compunction: O Lord, though I am struck with the fear of 
Thee, * I cease not from doing evil. * What man under judgment feareth not 
the judge? * Or who wishing to be healed doth provoke the physician to anger 
as I do? * O longsuffering Lord, take pity on mine infirmity ** and have mercy 
on me. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Martyricon: Armed with the shield of faith, * and strengthened with the sign 
of the Cross, * Thy Saints, O Lord, of their own accord * went forth 
courageously unto torments * and destroyed the deception and audacity of the 
devil. * By their intercessions, * since Thou art the almighty God, * send down 
peace upon the World, ** and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Christ God, Who by Thy merciful compassion became incarnate, * with 
Thy fingers which hath fashioned all things * Thou didst touch clay to the eyes 
of him who from the womb was bereft of sight * and didst thereby deem him 
worthy of divine brilliance * by Thine ineffable compassion. * And now do 
Thou Thyself, O Bestower of light, * illumine also the senses of our souls, ** 
since Thou alone art the bountiful Bestower of good gifts.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * 
and who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * 
Cease not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let us, O faithful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TUESDAY IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, * 
and upon those in the tombs bestowing life. (2 1/2 times) 
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * 
and who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * 
Cease not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VII) The following Sessional Hymns 
from the Oktoechos, in Tone V: 
O Lord, Thou who hast put death to death, * was called dead; * Thou who 
hast emptied the tombs was placed in a tomb; * above, the soldiers stood 
guarding the grave, * below, Thou didst raise the dead from all ages. * O Lord, 
All-powerful and Incomprehensible, ** glory be to Thee! 
Verse: O Lord condemn me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
A Hymn of Compunction: When the Judge taketh His seat and the angels 
stand in their places, * when the trumpet soundeth and the flame is burning, * 
what shalt thou do, O my soul, * as thou art led away to judgment? * For then 
thine evil deeds shall be brought before thee * and Thy secret offences shall be 
reproved. * Wherefore, cry to the Judge before the end: ** O God, be gracious 
unto me and save me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Martyricon: Today the memory of the passion-bearers doth shine forth, * 
for it hath its radiance from heaven. * The choir of angels keepeth festival, * 
and the race of mankind doth celebrate together with them. * Wherefore, they 
intercede before the Lord ** that our souls be granted mercy. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Theotokion: O most holy Mother of God, * thou bulwark of Christians: * as 
is thy manner, deliver thy people * who diligently supplicate thee; * do battle 
against our shameful and proud thoughts, * that we may cry out to thee: ** 
Rejoice, O Ever-virgin!  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VIII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
By the spittle of Him that had fashioned man, * The man blind from his 
birth, having never seen the sun, * was able to see with eyes. * Wherefore, he 
sent up heartfelt thanksgiving to God, * for he beheld the image of Him * 
which had been formed in the likeness ** of the One Who had made and 
fashioned it. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then “Let us who have beheld the Resurrection of Christ ...,” and the 50th 
Psalm. For the Canons: the Canon of The Blind man with its Irmos to make 
eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in each Ode. At the Third 
Ode, the Kontakion & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., 
the Sessional Hymn of the Blind man. At the Sixth ODE the Kontakion and 
Ikos of Blind man. At the Ninth Ode, the Exapostilarion of Pascha and the 
Blind man. The Canon in Tone V: 
ODE I 
Irmos: A land which the sun had never beheld, * and upon which it had 
never shined, * an abyss which the vault of heaven had not seen laid bare, 
* hath Israel traversed dry-shod, O Lord. * And Thou didst lead them to 
Thy mountain of sanctification, * as they sang and chanted * a hymn of 
victory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Having accepted a voluntary crucifixion in the flesh, Thou didst pour forth 
blessing and life unto the world, O only most blessed Master and Creator of all. 
Wherefore we bless and praise and glorify Thee, singing and chanting a hymn of 
victory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou hadst died, O Christ, the noble Joseph laid Thee in a hollow, 
even the lowest pit, and he rolled a stone against the entrance of the sepulcher, 
O Long-suffering One. But Thou didst arise in glory and didst raise up the 
world together with Thyself, as it sang and chanted a hymn of victory.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Why bring ye myrrh with tears? said the angel who appeared unto the 
venerable women. Christ is risen. Make haste and tell it to the disciples, those 
seers of God who are lamenting and weeping, so that they may radiantly leap 
and dance for joy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The Redeemer performed strange wonders, in that He healed the man who 
had been blind from birth. He anointed him with clay and said: Go and wash in 
Siloam, that thou mightest know that I am God, Who by the bowels of My 
compassion walk upon the earth while bearing flesh.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: As we venerate one essence in three hypostases, O ye faithful, 
let us glorify the Father, and Son, and Upright Spirit, the Creator and Lord and 
Redeemer of all, one uncreated God, and let us cry out with the Bodiless: Holy, 
Holy, Holy art Thou, O King. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Out of compassion, the Lord dwelt in thy womb, which knew 
not wedlock, O pure one, for He wished to save mankind who, through the 
devices of the enemy, had become subject to corruption. Entreat Him, 
therefore, that this city be saved from every enemy assault and conquest. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia in Tone I: It is the Day of Resurrection, * let us be radiant, O 
ye people; * Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha: * for from death to life, * and 
from earth to heaven, * Christ God hath brought us, * as we sing the 
song of victory 
ODE III 
Irmos: Do Thou establish my heart, O Lord, * which is shaken by the 
billows of life, * and guide it to a calm haven, O God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst make steadfast the hearts of those who were shaken when Thou 
didst make the earth to shake at Thy venerated crucifixion, to which Thou didst 
submit in the flesh, O Long-suffering One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The noble Joseph laid Thee in a new tomb, O compassionate One. But 
Thou didst arise from the dead on the third day, thereby renewing us.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Why seek ye the Lord as though He were dead? He is risen as He said, 
proclaimed the angel unto the women, as he flashed forth with radiant divinity.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst heal the man who was blind from birth, who of old came unto 
Thee and glorified Thy dispensation and Thy wonders, O All-compassionate 
One.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: We worship God the Father, the Son Who is beginningless from 
before all time, and the divine Spirit, the threefold uncreated nature in three 
Hypostases, the one God of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: From thy virginal womb thou didst give birth unto God 
incarnate. Do thou beseech Him, O all-holy Lady, that He have compassion 
upon us. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Come, let us drink a new drink, * not one miraculously 
brought forth from a barren rock * but the Fountain of Incorruption, * 
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, * in Whom we are strengthened. 
Kontakion, Ikos & Sessional Hymns of the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
As the Master and Fashioner of all things passed by, * He encountered along 
the way a blind man who was seated there * and who mourned aloud, saying: * 
All my life I have beheld neither the sun shining forth * nor laid eyes on the 
bright luminescence of the moon. * Yet since Thou wast born of an immaculate 
Virgin so as to fill all with light, * do Thou now fill me with Thy light, in that 
Thou art compassionate. * And thus I shall adore Thee and cry: * Sovereign 
Master, Christ my God, forgive me my sins, ** in Thine abundant compassion, 
O Thou only Lover of mankind.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard Thy report, O Lord, * and I was afraid. * I came to 
knowledge of Thy dispensation, * and I glorified Thee, * O only Lover of 
mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 8 ---
When Thou Who art Life wast hung upon the Tree, by Thy great mercy 
Thou didst quicken me who had died because of the tree. For this cause I 
glorify Thee, O Word.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Dwelling together with Thine initiates in a wondrous manner, O Lord, Thou 
didst say unto them: Go, proclaim everywhere My Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst confirm Thine arising from the grave, O Lord, when Thou didst 
abide for many days with those who loved Thee, thereby causing them to 
rejoice, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst give eyes unto the man who had been blind from the 
womb, Thou didst say: Go, wash and receive thy sight, and glorify My Divinity.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: O beginningless Trinity, one in honour, undivided in essence, 
divided in hypostases, save all those who glorify Thee with faith and fear. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We glorify thy childbirth which is above nature, O immaculate 
One, and with faith we bless thee as the Birthgiver of the God of all, O most 
immaculate One. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: On divine watch * let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with 
us, * and show forth the light-bearing angel * clearly saying: * Today 
salvation is come to the world, * for Christ is risen as Almighty. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Hasten Thou and have compassion on my wretched soul, * which 
doth battle at night * with the darkness of the passions. * Shine in me 
with the brightness of the day, * O noetic Sun, * and thereby make the 
night give way to light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast lifted up upon a Tree and didst exalt all mortal men together 
with Thyself. Thou didst both slay the hostile serpent and give life to the work 
of Thy hands, O compassionate One, since Thou alone art the God of all.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 Thou Who didst willingly die wast laid in a tomb, and Thou didst empty all 
the domains of Hades, O Immortal King, raising up the dead by Thy 
Resurrection.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Though Thou hadst wrought wondrous miracles upon the earth, a lawless 
people put Thee to death, O Word. But since Thou Thyself alone art mighty, O 
Lord, Thou didst arise from the dead, even as Thou didst foretell, O Christ.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst open the eyes of him who could not see perceptible light, 
Thou didst enlighten the eyes of his soul as well. Thou didst move him to 
glorify Thee, for he had come to know Thee as the Creator, Who out of 
compassion didst appear as a mortal man.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: O ye faithful, let us all glorify the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity 
in Trinity, the Father, Son, and Upright Spirit, one God, Who is truly the 
Creator of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: How didst thou give birth without wedlock, O pure Virgin 
Mother, full of Grace? How dost thou nourish Him that nourisheth creation? It 
is as He alone knoweth, for He is the Creator and God of all. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Let us awake in the deep dawn, * and instead of myrrh, offer a 
hymn * to the Master, * and we shall see Christ, the Sun of 
Righteousness, * Who causeth life to dawn for all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Even as Thou didst deliver the prophet from the beast, O Lord, * 
so do Thou lead me up from the depths * of unrestrained passions, I pray 
Thee, * that I may dare * to look upon Thy holy temple. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
O Master, Who wast crucified with thieves, Thou didst deliver from crafty 
thieves and soul-corrupting passions all those who with one accord praise Thy 
crucifixion and arising, O man-befriending Lord.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  

--- PAGE 10 ---
In a sepulcher they laid Thee dead and without breath, O Christ, Who dost 
breathe life into all the dead. But Thou didst arise, O Lord, emptying all the 
tombs by Thy divine might, O Word.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
After Thine arising, O Christ, Thou didst say unto Thy friends: Tarry ye in 
Jerusalem, until ye be endued with invincible power and sure assistance from on 
high.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst make clay and didst anoint the eyes of the man who had been 
blind from his birth. Thou didst grant him his sight, and he praised Thine 
immaculate might, whereby Thou hast saved the world, O Word. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: O Unity of three Hypostases, Unbegotten Father, Begotten Son, 
and Thou Spirit Who proceedest, thrice-holy Lord, one essence and might, save 
all Thy people. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Who can tell of thy mighty deeds, O pure One? For, in a 
manner surpassing nature, thou didst give birth in the flesh unto God, Who 
through thee doth deliver the world from all sin, O all-immaculate Virgin. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Thou didst descend into * the nethermost parts of the earth, * 
and didst shatter the eternal bars * that held the fettered, O Christ, * and 
on the third day, * like Jonah from the whale, * Thou didst arise from the 
tomb. 
Kontakion of the Blind Man, in Tone IV: 
Since my soul’s noetic eyes are blind and sightless, * I have come to Thee, O 
Christ, * as did the man who was blind from birth. * And in repentance I cry 
unto Thee: ** Of those in darkness Thou art the most radiant Light.  
Ikos: Grant me a stream of ineffable wisdom and knowledge from on high, 
O Christ, Thou Light of them that are in darkness and Guide of all those who 
are gone astray, that I may tell of those things that the divine book of the 
Gospel of peace hath taught, to wit, the miracle that was wrought upon the 
blind man; for though blind from birth, he receiveth the physical eyes as well as 
the eyes of the soul, as he crieth out in faith: Of those in darkness art Thou the 
most radiant Light.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: The prayer of the children quenched the fire * and the furnace 
which bedewed them proclaimed the miracle, * for it neither burned nor 
consumed them, * that chanted hymns unto the God of our Fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou was hung upon the Tree, O Savior, the sun was quenched, the 
earth was tossed like waves in a tempest, all creation was shaken, and the dead 
arose from the graves.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Thou didst rise from the dead, O King, the souls that were sleeping 
there were raised together with Thee; and they glorify Thy might, whereby the 
bonds of death have been dissolved.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
The choir of women came at dawn to anoint Thee. But on learning that 
Thou hadst arisen, O Lord, they rejoiced together with the sacred disciples. 
Through them do Thou grant us the forgiveness of the evil deeds we have 
done.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst anoint the eyes of the blind man with clay and didst command 
him to go to Siloam. When he had washed, he received his sight and chanted 
hymns of praise to Thee, O Christ, Thou King of all.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: Let us praise the beginningless Father, the co-beginningless Son, 
and the all-holy Spirit. Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O God, Thou King of all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou was seen to be a Virgin after giving birth, O pure One; 
for thou didst bear God, Who by His might renewed every nature, O most pure 
One. Do thou ever beseech Him that we be saved. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: He Who delivered the children * from the furnace, became a 
man, * and suffereth as a mortal, * and through His Passion * doth 
clothe mortality * with the beauty of incorruption, * He is the only 
blessed and supremely glorious God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: O ye company of angels, * and assembly of mankind; * ye priests, 
Levites, and peoples: * praise, bless, and supremely exalt the King and 
Creator of all, * throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the orders of the angels beheld Thee hanging upon the Cross and all 
creation being changed out of fear, O Christ, Thou King of all, they stood in 
awe and praised Thy love for mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Upon seeing Thee below, Hades groaned and made haste to surrender the 
dead, whom he had guarded there from all ages, O Christ, and they chanted 
hymns in praise of Thy love for mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst accomplish awesome and wondrous things when of Thine own 
will Thou wast raised up upon the Cross, O Christ. Thou Who didst put Hades 
to death didst become one with the dead and courageously released all who 
were chained therein.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou gavest eyes unto the blind man who came unto Thee, O Christ. Thou 
didst command him to wash at the spring of Siloam and thus gain his sight, and 
proclaim Thee as God, Who hath appeared in the flesh for the salvation of the 
world.  
Refrain: Let us bless Father, Son, Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
Trinitarion: O undivided Trinity, uncommingled Unity, God of all and 
Creator of all, save from all manner of temptations those who faithfully praise 
and worship Thy dominion.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O immaculate Virgin, full of Grace, ever beseech thy Son that 
He put me not to shame in the day of judgment, but that He number me with 
His chosen flock. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Katavasia: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * wherein 
we bless Christ throughout the ages. 
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: For the mighty One hath done great things to thee, * in that He 
showed thee forth as a pure Virgin * even after giving birth, * since thou 
art she that hath seedlessly borne her own creator, * wherefore, O 
Theotokos, * we magnify thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou wast affixed upon the Cross, O Christ God, and didst triumph over all 
the opposing powers of the enemy, and didst do away with the former curse, O 
Savior. Wherefore, as is meet, we magnify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When Hades beheld Thee below with Thy soul, O Word, he groaned, and 
out of fear, set loose all the dead, who acknowledged the power of Thine 
authority; with them, as is due, we magnify Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
When the assembly of the Hebrews beheld Him performing signs and 
wondrous miracles, they put Him to death out of malice; yet it was He Who 
despoiled Hades by His Resurrection and Who, as He is mighty, raised up all 
mankind together with Himself.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, Our God, Glory to Thee  
Thou didst arise from the dead as Thou didst say, and didst appear unto 
Thy holy disciples after Thine arising, O Thou Giver of life, Who hath wrought 
signs and granted eyes to the blind. With them we magnify Thee throughout the 
ages.  
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity, our God, Glory to Thee.  
Trinitarion: I reverence the Father as Light, I glorify the Son as Light, and I 
praise the Upright Spirit as Light: One undivided Light, perceived in three 
Hypostases, the God and King of all creation. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou wast seen to be more spacious than the heavens, O pure 
Virgin, when in bodily fashion thou didst contain God, the uncircumscribable 
One, and didst give birth unto Him for the redemption of all who praise thee 
with undoubting faith.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Exapostilarion of Pascha, in Tone III: 
Having fallen asleep in the flesh, * as a mortal, * O King and Lord, * on 
the third day Thou didst rise again, * raising up Adam from corruption, * and 
abolishing death: * O Pascha of incorruption, ** Salvation of the world! (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Blind Man:  
Enlighten my noetic eyes which are bereft of sight, O Lord, because of 
sin’s gloomy darkness. And since Thou art compassionate, instill in me humility. 
Cleanse Thou me by the tears of repentance and change of heart.  
On the Praises, 4 Stichera from the Oktoechos, in Tone V: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
O Lord, having smashed the eternal bars and burst asunder the bonds of 
Hades, * Thou didst arise from the tomb, * leaving Thy grave clothes behind in 
testimony of Thy three day burial. * Whereupon Thou didst go forth into 
Galilee, * while yet being guarded in a cave. * Great is Thy mercy, O Savior, and 
beyond understanding; ** have mercy upon us. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet: * Praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: O Lord, having smashed ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance: * Praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
A Hymn of Compunction: Overlook the multitude of mine offences, O 
Lord, * Who wast born of the Virgin. * Blot out all mine iniquities * and grant 
me the thought of returning to Thee, * since Thou alone lovest mankind, ** I 
pray Thee have mercy on me. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Martyricon: Imitating the orders of the angels, * Thy passion-bearers 
endured torments, * as though they were bodiless ones O Lord; * for they kept 
a single hope before their minds, * even the enjoyment of Thy promised good 
things. * By their intercessions, O Christ our God, * grant peace unto Thy 
world ** and great mercy to our souls. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Pentecostarion, in Tone V: 
Who can tell of Thy mighty acts, O Christ, * or who can number the 
multitudes of Thy wonders? * For even as Thou, in Thy goodness, didst appear 
on earth twofold of nature, * so didst Thou grant twofold healings to the sick; * 
for Thou didst open not only the bodily eyes of the man who was blind from 
the womb, * but those of his soul also. ** Wherefore, he confessed Thee, the 
hidden God, Who grantest great mercy unto all.  
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Those who observed the Law of Moses, * upon seeing the effulgent and 
radiant light * which illumined the blind man on the Sabbath day, * themselves 
became noetically blind, * seeing shadows which obscured the Law * and hid 
from them Him Who by His Word * hath fashioned both the Sabbath and light, 
* and to the blind man who had washed himself, * He hath given eyes by a 
wondrous clay mixture of His pure spittle with dust. * Let us join with that man 
and so behold God; * and upon seeing that which is better, ** may we censure 
the blindness which gripped the Pharisees. 
Verse: Look upon me, * and have mercy on me. 
Morning hath dawned for him * who walked in the dark night of blindness, 
* the much suffering blind man, * who by divine command washed in the pool 
of Siloam, * and received his sight. * Wherefore he is seen as a new light-bearer, 
* rebuking the night-creating darkness * which had enveloped the scribes of the 
ancient Law, * illumining their blindness by His most luminous effulgence. * 
from which the blindness of the letter of the Law * hath now been granted 
sight, ** by the brilliant radiant light granted us by the Word. 
Verse: My steps do Thou direct * according to Thy saying. 
The blind man who endured blindness in body * and noetic darkness, * 
ascended to the heights of illumination * through divine knowledge, * by the 
wondrous and new outpourings of light from the Word. * Though in the past 
he was doubly blinded, * he came to know the Light-giver, * Who arose on the 
third day from the sepulcher, * and Who hath made the earth radiant by His 
Resurrection, * from Whom the light of our refashioning hath shone forth in 
the darkness gripping mankind ** for the sake of His lovingkindness and great 
mercy. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O Christ God, Thou spiritual Sun of Righteousness, * Who by Thy most 
pure touch didst bestow a twofold enlightenment * upon him who from his 
mother’s womb was deprived of sight, * illumine Thou the eyes of our souls 
also, * and prove us to be sons of the day, that we may cry to Thee with faith: 
** Great and ineffable is Thy compassion toward us, O Lover of man; glory be 
to Thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * 
and who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * 
Cease not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Let us, O faithful ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Theotokion of the Menaion Troparion. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death.  
Choir: And upon those in the tombs bestowing life. 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
TUESDAY OF THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IV of the Canon. 
When Thou Who art Life wast hung upon the Tree, by Thy great mercy 
Thou didst quicken me who had died because of the tree. For this cause I 
glorify Thee, O Word.  
Dwelling together with Thine initiates in a wondrous manner, O Lord, Thou 
didst say unto them: Go, proclaim everywhere My Resurrection.  
Thou didst confirm Thine arising from the grave, O Lord, when Thou didst 
abide for many days with them that loved Thee, thereby causing them to 
rejoice, O Christ.  
When Thou didst give eyes unto the man who had been blind from the 
womb, Thou didst say: Go, wash and receive thy sight, and glorify My Divinity.  
Glory ..., O beginningless Trinity, one in honour, undivided in essence, 
divided in hypostases, save all them that glorify Thee with faith and fear.  
Both now ..., Theotokion: We glorify thy childbirth which is above nature, 
and with faith we bless thee as the Birthgiver of the God of all, O most 
immaculate One.  
At the Entrance The Troparion, in Tone V: 
Let us, O faithful, praise and worship the Word * Who is co-beginningless 
with the Father and the Spirit, * and Who was born of the Virgin for our 
salvation; * for He was pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh * and to endure 
death, ** and to raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Blind Man, in Tone IV: 
Since my soul’s noetic eyes are blind and sightless, * I have come to Thee, O 
Christ, * as did the man who was blind from birth. * And in repentance I cry 
unto Thee: ** Of those in darkness Thou art the most radiant Light.  
 
The Prokeimenon: 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Make your vows and pay them * to the 
Lord our God. 
Verse: In Judea is God known, His name is great in Israel. 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (ACTS 17:19 - 28) 
In those days, they took Paul, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May 
we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? For thou bringest 
certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things 
mean. (For all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in 
nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.) Then Paul stood in 
the midst of Mars’ hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things 
ye are too superstitious. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found 
an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore 
ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. God that made the world and all 
things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in 
temples made with hands; Neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though 
he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; And 
hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the 
earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their 
habitation; That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, 
and find him, though he be not far from every one of us: For in him we live, 
and move, and have our being. 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Look upon me and have mercy on me. 
Verse: My steps do Thou direct according to Thy saying. 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (12:19 - 36) 
At that time: The Pharisees said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye 
prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him. And there were certain 
Greeks among them that came up to worship at the feast: The same came 
therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, 
Sir, we would see Jesus. Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: and again Andrew 
and Philip tell Jesus. And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that 
the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn 
of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth 
forth much fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in 
this world shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man serve me, let him follow me; 
and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will 
my Father honour. Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save 

--- PAGE 19 ---
me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy 
name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, 
and will glorify it again. The people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said 
that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to him. Jesus answered and said, 
This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. Now is the judgment of 
this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up 
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said, signifying what death 
he should die. The people answered him, We have heard out of the law that 
Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted 
up? who is this Son of man? Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the 
light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for 
he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have light, 
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. 
 
In place of “It is meet” The Zadostoinik is chanted from ODE IX. 
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is full of grace: * Rejoice, O pure 
Virgin! And again I say, rejoice! * For thy Son is risen from the grave on 
the third day. 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Communion Verse: Receive ye the body of Christ, taste ye of the 
fountain of immortality. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
  
We sing “Christ is risen ...,” instead of “We have seen the true light ...,” 
At the dismissal, when the priest saith: “Glory to Thee, O Christ God 
...,” The Choir chanteth “Christ is risen ...,” x3 instead of “Glory ..., Both now 
..., Father bless!” Then the priest giveth the dismissal. 
 
 
