--- PAGE 1 ---
THE ASCENSION OF OUR LORD GOD  
AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST 
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera from the Pentecostarion, in Tone VI: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
The Lord was taken up into the heavens * that He might send the 
Comforter unto the world. * The heavens made ready His throne, and the 
clouds His Ascension. * The angels marvel as they see a man more exalted than 
they. * The Father receiveth Him Whom He had with Him eternally in His 
bosom. * The Holy Spirit commandeth all His angels: * Lift up your gates, O ye 
princes. * All ye nations, clap your hands; ** Christ hath ascended whither He 
was before. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Repeat: The Lord was taken up into the heavens ..., 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
O Lord, the cherubim were amazed at Thine Ascension, * when they beheld 
Thee, O God, * Who sittest on them, * ascending upon the clouds. * And we 
glorify Thee, for Thy mercy is good. ** Glory be to Thee. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Repeat: O Lord, the cherubim were amazed at Thine Ascension ..., 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Having beheld Thine ascents on the holy mountains, O Christ, * Thou 
effulgence of the Father’s glory, * we praise the radiant likeness of thy 
countenance. * We worship Thy passion, * we honor Thy Resurrection, * and 
we glorify Thy glorious Ascension. ** Have mercy on us. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Repeat: Having beheld Thine ascents on the holy mountains ..., 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * 
let Israel hope in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
O Lord, as the apostles saw Thee being lifted up in the clouds, * O life-
giving Christ, * they were filled with sorrow and wept with lamentation, saying 
with grief: * O Master, leave not as orphans * us Thy servants whom Thou 
didst love in Thy mercy, * since Thou art compassionate. * But as Thou didst 
promise, * send us Thy most holy Spirit, ** to illumine our souls. 
 Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Repeat: O Lord, as the apostles saw Thee being lifted up ..., 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
O Lord, when Thou didst fulfill the mystery of Thy dispensation, * Thou 
didst take Thy disciples and ascend the Mount of Olives; * and behold, Thou 
didst pass through the firmament of heaven. * O Thou Who for my sake didst 
become poor like unto me, * and Who didst ascend thither * whence Thou wast 
not separated, ** send forth Thy most holy Spirit to enlighten our souls. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Repeat: O Lord, when Thou didst fulfill the mystery ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Not being separated from the bosom of the Father, * O most sweet Jesus, * 
and having lived on earth as a man, * Thou wast taken up in glory today from 
the Mount of Olives. * And having raised our fallen nature by Thy compassion, 
* Thou didst seat it together with the Father. * Wherefore, the heavenly orders 
of the bodiless ones were amazed at the wonder * and stood in awe and 
astonishment. * They were seized with trembling and magnified Thy love for 
mankind. * With them we on earth also glorify Thy condescension toward us, * 
and Thine Ascension from us, * entreating and saying: * O Thou Who by Thine 
Ascension didst fill with infinite joy * Thy disciples and the Theotokos who 
gave birth to Thee, * by their prayers count us also worthy of the joy of Thy 
chosen ones, ** for the sake of Thy great mercy. 
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Wednesday Vespers Prokeimenon: 
The Prokeimenon in the 5th Tone. O God, in Thy name save me, * and 
in Thy strength do Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Then the Three Scriptural Lessons: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH 
Thus saith the Lord: In the last days the mountain of the LORD shall be 
manifest, and the house of God shall be on the summits of the mountains, and 
it shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall come to it. And many 
people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us ascend to the mountain of the 
LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and 
we will walk in his paths. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH 
Thus saith the Lord: Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way 
of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a 
standard for the people. Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto the end of 
the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; 
behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. And they shall call 
them, The holy people, The redeemed of the LORD: and thou shalt be called, 
Sought out, a city not forsaken. Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed 
garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the 
greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. 
Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth 
in the winefat? I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was 
none with me. I remembered the mercy of the LORD, I shall recall the virtues 
of the Lord, the praises of the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath 
bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he 
hath bestowed on them according to his mercy, and according to the abundance 
of his righteousness. And He said, Are ye not my people? They are My children, 
and they shall not set Me at naught. And He became for them salvation out of 
all their affliction. Not an ambassador, nor an angel, but the Lord Himself saved 
them, because He loved them and spared them; He Himself redeemed them 
and took them up, and lifted them up for all the says of eternity. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ZACHARIAH 
Thus saith the Lord: Behold the day of the Lord cometh, and His feet shall 
stand in that day on the Mount of Olives, which lieth opposite Jerusalem on the 
side whence is the dawning of the sun. And in that day living water shall come 
forth out of Jerusalem; half of it toward the former sea; and half toward the 
latter sea; and so it shall be in summer and spring. And the Lord shall be king 
over all the earth; in that day there shall be one Lord, and His Name one, 
compassing all the earth, and the wilderness from Geba unto Rimmon, the 
south of Jerusalem. And He shall be exalted and shall remain in that place, from 
the gate of Benjamin to the place of the first gate, to the gate of Gomor, and to 
the tower of Hananeel, and to the gate of the corners, as far as the king’s 

--- PAGE 4 ---
winepress. They shall dwell therein; and there shall be no more any thing 
accursed, and Jerusalem shall dwell securely. 
At Litiya, in Tone I: 
As Thou didst ascend into the heavens, * from whence Thou didst also 
descend, * leave us not orphaned, O Lord; * let Thy Spirit come, bringing peace 
unto the world; * show Thou unto the sons of men the works of Thy might, ** 
O Lord and Lover of mankind.  
Though Thou wast not parted from His uncircumscribable bosom, * Thou 
didst ascend unto Thy beginningless Father, O Christ, * and the hosts on high 
accepted no addition to the thrice-holy praise. * But even after Thou didst 
become man * they recognized Thee as the one Son, * only-begotten of the 
Father, O Lord. ** In the multitude of Thy compassions, have mercy on us. 
Thine angels said unto the apostles, O Lord: * Ye men of Galilee, * why 
stand ye looking up into heaven? * This is Christ God, Who hath been taken up 
from you into heaven. * He shall come again in the manner ye have seen Him 
going into heaven. ** Worship Him in holiness and righteousness. 
Tone IV: When Thou, O Christ, * didst come unto the Mount of Olives * 
to accomplish the good will of the Father, * the heavenly angels were amazed * 
and the nethermost regions shuddered with fear. * The disciples stood by with 
joy and trembling * as Thou spakest unto them, * and a cloud prepared as a 
throne awaited opposite them; * and heaven, throwing open the gates, shone 
with comeliness; * and the earth revealeth its hidden chambers, * that the 
descent and immediate ascent might be made known unto Adam; * but his 
steps were led upwards as it were by a hand, * and his mouth was heard blessing 
Thee greatly; * the cloud took Thee up and heaven received Thee within itself. * 
Thou hast wrought this great and strange deed, O Lord, ** for the salvation of 
our souls. 
Thou hast renewed in Thyself Adam’s nature, * which had gone down into 
the lower parts of the earth, * and Thou didst raise it up above every 
principality and authority today. * For since Thou didst love it, Thou didst seat 
it together with Thyself; * since Thou hast taken compassion on it, Thou didst 
unite it to Thyself; * since Thou didst unite it to Thyself, Thou didst suffer with 
it; * and enduring the Passion, though Thou art impassable, * Thou didst glorify 
it. * But the Bodiless ones said: Who is this comely man? * But not only is He 
man, but God and man; * that which is manifest is twofold. * Wherefore, beside 
themselves, * the angels, flying about clad in radiant vesture, * cried unto the 
disciples: Ye men of Galilee, * He that is gone from you, * Jesus, Man and God, 
* shall come again as the God-man to judge the living and the dead; * and He 
granteth unto the faithful ** the forgiveness of sins and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
When Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ God, * while the disciples were 
watching, * the clouds took Thee up with Thy flesh; * the heavenly gates were 
lifted up; * the choir of the angels rejoiced with rejoicing; * the powers above 
cried aloud, saying: * Lift up thy gates, O ye princes, * and the King of Glory 
shall enter therein. * And the disciples were astonished and said: * Be Thou not 
parted from us, O Good Shepherd, ** but send unto us Thy most holy Spirit to 
guide and establish our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
O Lord, having fulfilled the mystery * that was hidden from before the ages 
and from all generations, * as Thou art good Thou didst come with Thy 
disciples to the Mount of Olives, * having together with Thyself her that gave 
birth * unto Thee, the Creator and Fashioner of all things; * for it was meet that 
she * who, as Thy Mother, suffered at Thy Passion more than all, * should also 
enjoy the surpassing joy * of the glorification of Thy flesh, O Master, * which 
we have attained by Thine Ascension to the heavens, ** and we glorify Thy 
great mercy toward us. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Feast, in Tone II: 
Thou wast born as Thou Thyself didst will; * Thou didst appear of Thine 
own choice; * Thou didst suffer in the flesh, O our God. * Thou didst arise 
from the dead, trampling down death; * and Thou didst ascend in glory, O 
Thou Who fillest all things, * and didst send unto us the divine Spirit, ** that we 
may praise and glorify Thy Divinity. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
Beholding Thee being taken up * from the Mount of Olives, O Christ, * the 
Powers cried one to another: Who is this? * And it was said unto them: * This is 
He that is strong and mighty. * This is He that is mighty in war. * This is truly 
the King of Glory. * And wherefore are His garments red? * Because He 
cometh from Bozrah, which is the flesh. * But Thou Thyself, being God, * didst 
sit at the right hand of majesty * and didst send unto us the Holy Spirit, ** that 
He may guide and save our souls. 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Thou wast taken up in glory from the Mount of Olives, O Christ God, * in 
the presence of Thy disciples, * and didst sit down at the right hand of the 
Father, * O Thou Who dost fill all things with Thy Divinity; * and Thou didst 
send unto them the Holy Spirit, * Who doth illumine ** and strengthen and 
sanctify our souls. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the trumpet, * to 
raise the fallen image of Adam, ** and to send the Comforting Spirit to sanctify 
our souls. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
Then the Troparion of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. (Thrice) 
The blessing of the loaves. Then 
Blessed be the Name of the Lord ..., and the rest. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS:  
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIII), Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
While angels gazed with wonder upon Thy dread Ascension, * and while the 
disciples were awestruck as Thou wast taken from earth, * O Savior, as God 
Thou didst ascend in glory * while the gates were raised for Thee. * For this 
cause then the Hosts of the heavens cried out, * while marveling in amazement: 
* Glory to Thy descent, O Savior Christ. * Glory to Thy Kingdom’s 
sovereignty. * Glory be to Thine Ascension, ** O Thou only Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIV), Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
God the beginningless One, Who existed before all ages, * and Who took 
man’s nature upon Himself, * and mystically deified it, was taken up on this day. 
* Hence, the angels ran before and indicated Him unto the apostles * as He 
rose with great glory to heaven’s heights. * And as they worshipped Him, they 
cried aloud and said ** Glory be to God Who was taken up. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
The Polyeleos (Select verses): 
Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. Alleluia, 
alleluia, alleluia.  
Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia, alleluia, 
alleluia. 
O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth forever. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Megalynarion: We magnify Thee, * O Christ the Giver of life, * and we 
honor Thy divine ascension ** with Thy most pure Flesh into heaven.  
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
The Small Litany: 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Then the Sessional Hymn of the Feast, in Tone V: 
Having come down from heaven unto the things of earth, * O Christ, as 
God, with Thyself, Thou didst resurrect Adam’s form, * which lay prostrate in 
the nether holds of Hades’ vault; * in Thine Ascension to the heights * Thou 
didst lead it up unto the heavens and Thou didst seat it * upon the throne of 
Thy Father, ** since Thou, the Lover of mankind, art merciful. 
The Songs of Ascent, 1st Antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, ** by the 
fire shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is 
exalted and made radiant ** by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner. 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord 
with the voice of the trumpet. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing.. 
Let every breath ..., 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK: (19:9-20) 
At that time: Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first 
to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils. And she went and 
told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept. And they, when 
they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not. After 
that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went 
into the country. And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed 
they them. Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and 
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed 
not them which had seen him after he was risen. And he said unto them, Go ye 
into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and 
is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these 
signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they 
shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any 
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they 
shall recover. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up 
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth, and 

--- PAGE 9 ---
preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word 
with signs following. Amen. 
Then, in Tone VI: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy 
holy Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we 
know none other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye 
faithful, * let us worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the 
Cross joy hath come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His 
Resurrection; * for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by 
death. (Once) 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
 Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and 
according to the multitude of Thy compassions, * blot out my transgressions. 
Tone VI: Today the hosts on high, * beholding our nature in the heavens * 
marvel at the strange manner of its ascent, * and, being perplexed, they said one 
to another: * Who is this that cometh? * And when they saw that it was their 
own Master, * they were commanded to lift up the heavenly gates, * Who again 
shalt come from thence in the flesh, ** as the Judge of all and the Almighty 
God.  
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” The Canon in Tone V: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod through 
the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us 
sing: * For He is glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O all ye peoples, let us sing a song of victory unto Christ, Who is taken up 
with glory upon the shoulders of the cherubim, and Who hath seated us 
together with Himself at the right hand of the Fathers; for He is glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Beholding Christ, the Mediator between God and man, with His flesh in the 
heights, the choirs of the angels were amazed, and with one accord they sang a 
hymn of victory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us all sing unto God, Who was seen upon Mount Sinai, and Who gave 
the Law unto Moses, the seer of God, and Who ascended from the Mount of 
Olives in the flesh, for He is glorified. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
O most pure Mother of God, do thou unceasingly intercede with Him Who 
assumed flesh from thee, yet was not separated from the bosom of the Father, 
that He save from every danger those whom He hath fashioned. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou Who art immortal by nature didst arise on the third day, and didst 
appear unto the eleven and all the disciples, and riding upon a cloud, didst 
hasten back unto the Father, O Thou Creator of all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The God-inspired David cried out, chanting most plainly: The Lord hath 
ascended into the heavens in jubilation and with the voice of the trumpet, 
reaching even unto the Father, the Source of light. 
Glory ..., O Lord, by Thy Passion and Thy Resurrection Thou didst renew 
the world, which had grown old in many sins; and riding upon a cloud, Thou 
didst ascend into the heavens. Glory be to Thy glory. 
 Both now ..., O all-immaculate Lady, thou didst conceive the Master of all, 
Who willingly submitted to the Passion and went up unto His Father, Whom 
He had not left, though He had taken on flesh. 
Katavasia Tone IV: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of 
tongue proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the 
impurity from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is 
initiated into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-
inspired songs. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE III 
Irmos: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast 
mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy saving 
Ascension. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou didst go up unto the Father, O Life-giving Christ, and Thou didst 
exalt our race by Thine ineffable compassion, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The orders of angels, O Savior, on beholding man’s nature ascending 
together with Thee, were amazed and ceaselessly praised Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The choirs of angels were amazed, O Christ, as they beheld thee taken up 
with Thy body, and they praised Thy holy Ascension. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou didst raise up human nature which had fallen into corruption, O 
Christ, and in Thine Ascension Thou didst exalt us and glorify us together with 
Thyself. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Unceasingly entreat Him Who came forth from thy loins, O 
pure one, that those who praise thee as the Mother of God may be delivered 
from the deception of the devil. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Lift ye up the gates of heaven, behold, Christ the King and Lord is come, 
wearing a body of clay; thus spake the powers below to those on high. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having sought out Adam, who had been deceived by the guile of the 
serpent, Thou, being clothed with Adam’s nature, didst ascend and sit at the 
right hand of the Father, being of equal rank with Him; and the angels praised 
Thee. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., The earth doth celebrate and dance for joy, and heaven doth 
rejoice today on the Ascension of the Maker of creation, Who by His own will 
clearly united that which was separated. 
 Both now ..., Since thou hast given birth to God Who destroyed death and 
Who alone is immortal, O all-pure Virgin Mother, do thou ever entreat Him to 
slay the passions that slay me and to save me. 
Katavasia: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought 
a broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed 
the fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with 
children. 
 
Sessional Hymn of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Having mounted upon heaven’s clouds, O Christ, * Thou didst leave peace 
unto those upon the earth; * and Thou didst ascend and sit at the Father’s right 
hand on high, * since Thou art one in essence with Him, and the Spirit, O Lord; 
* for though Thou hadst appeared in the flesh, without undergoing change. * 
Wherefore Thou dost now wait till the last consummation, * when Thou shalt 
return to judge all of mankind upon the earth. * O Thou most righteous Judge 
and Lord, * since Thou art a greatly merciful God, * do Thou spare our souls 
and do Thou grant to us, Thy lowly servants, ** the pardon of our failings and 
our sins. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I heard the rumor of the power of the cross * that paradise is 
opened thereby * and I cried out aloud saying: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou wast taken up in glory, O King of the angels, that Thou mightest send 
us the Comforter from the Father. Wherefore we cry: Glory to Thine 
Ascension, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the Savior ascended in the flesh unto the Father, the arrays of the angels 
were astonished at Him and cried aloud: Glory to Thine Ascension, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The hosts of the angels cried unto those above: Lift up the gates for Christ 
our King; Him do we praise together with the Father and the Spirit. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: The Virgin gave birth without the experience of those things 
that pertain to motherhood. But though she was a mother, she remained a 
virgin; wherefore praising her, we cry: Rejoice, O Theotokos. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus 
the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he 
hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Jesus, the Giver of life, taking those whom He loved, went up on the Mount 
of Olives, and blessed them; and riding on a cloud, He came to the Father’s 
bosom, which He had in no wise left. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The whole world both visible and invisible, doth celebrate. angels and 
mortals leap for joy, unceasingly glorifying the Ascension of Him Who of His 
goodness was united to us in the flesh. 
Glory ..., Having destroyed the dominion of death since Thou art the 
immortal Lord, Thou didst grant immortality unto all, O Lover of mankind; and 
Thou wast taken up in glory, while the august disciples watched Thee, O 
Almighty Jesus. 
 Both now ..., Thy womb is become blessed, O all-immaculate one; for in an 
inexplicable manner thou wast deemed worthy to behold Him that marvelously 
emptied the belly of Hades. Entreat Him to save us who praise thee. 
Katavasia: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou 
art our God; * we know none other besides Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having filled all things with joy, O Merciful One, Thou didst come in Thy 
flesh unto the hosts on high. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
As the hosts of angels saw Thee being lifted up, they cried aloud: Lift ye the 
gates for our King. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the apostles beheld the Savior being lifted up on high, they cried with 
trembling: Glory be to Thee, O our King. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: We praise thee as a Virgin after childbirth, O Theotokos; for 
thou didst conceive God the Word in the flesh for the sake of the world. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God 
of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all 
who hymn thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having put death to death by Thy death, O Lord, Thou didst take those 
whom Thou didst love and didst ascend the holy Mount of Olives, and from 
thence, riding upon a cloud, Thou didst hasten up unto Thy Father, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Strange is Thy birth, strange is Thy Resurrection, strange and awesome, O 
Giver of life, is Thy divine Ascension from the mountain, which Elijah 
portrayed when he arose on a four-horsed chariot, as he praised Thee, O Lover 
of mankind. 
Glory ..., The angels spake unto the apostles as they looked on: O ye men of 
Galilee, why marvel ye at the Ascension of Christ, the Giver of life? He shall 
come again unto the earth to judge the whole world, since He is a most 
righteous Judge. 
 Both now ..., Having preserved thee as a virgin uncorrupted after 
childbirth, Christ went up to the Father, Whom He had not left, O Birthgiver of 
God, though by His ineffable mercy He had received from thee flesh endowed 
with both intelligence and life. 
Katavasia: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto 
light, * receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a 
redeeming purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth 
from Zion, * even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become 
my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and Thy 
right hand saved me, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
In their hope for the coming of the Spirit, the apostles leapt for joy as they 
beheld on high the Creator being lifted up, and they cried out with fear: Glory 
be to Thine ascent. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The angels came and cried unto Thy disciples, O Christ: In like manner as 
ye see Christ going up, so shall He, the righteous Judge of all, come in the flesh. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the hosts of heaven saw Thee, our Savior, being taken up into the heights 
together with Thy body, they cried out, saying: Great is Thy love for mankind, 
O Master. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Thou bush un-burnt, and mountain and living ladder, and 
gate of heaven, we glorify thee as is meet, O glorious Mary, thou boast of the 
Orthodox. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * 
O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let the clouds sprinkle upon us eternal joy from above; for riding upon a 
cloud as upon the cherubim, Christ is gone up unto His Father today. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having appeared in the likeness of the flesh, Thou didst gather together into 
one the things that were formerly separated, O Lover of mankind. And while 
the disciples were watching, O compassionate One, Thou wast taken up unto 
the heavens. 
Glory ..., Why are His garments red Who is united to the grossness of the 
flesh? The holy angels, on seeing Christ, extolled Him Who bare the divine 
symbols of the venerable Passion. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 Both now ..., We praise thy conception, O maiden; we praise thine ineffable 
birthgiving, whereby we were delivered from the destruction and misfortune 
and gloomy confinement in Hades, O pure one. 
Katavasia: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VI:  
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
Ikos: Leaving the things of earth upon the earth, and surrendering to the 
earth things of ashes, come, let us come to our senses and raise our eyes and 
thoughts on high; let us, O mortals, turn our gaze together with our senses up 
unto the heavenly gates. Let us consider ourselves present at the Mount of 
Olives, and gaze intently at the Redeemer who is riding upon a cloud; for the 
Lord hath hastened up from there into the heavens. And there the bountiful 
Giver of gifts distributed gifts unto His apostles, calling to them as a Father, 
and strengthening them; He guided them like Sons and said unto them: I am 
not separated from you; I am with you, and no one can be against you. 
SYNAXARION 
Verse: Thou didst sit at the right hand of the Father O Word 
Verse: Granting unto thine initiates a most steadfast faith 
When Christ was with the Disciples before His Passion, He promised them 
the coming of the all-holy Spirit, saying: “For if I go not away, the Comforter 
will not come unto you.” And again: “When He is come, He will teach you all 
the truth.” For this reason, after His arising from the dead, being seen of them 
for forty days, not always eating and drinking with them, but at intervals, He 
gave them firmer proof of His Resurrection. Finally, after making many 
promises concerning the Kingdom of God, He commanded them that they 
should not depart from Jerusalem, but await there the coming of the all-holy 
Spirit, since they were to be baptized through Him. He commanded them to 
remain in Jerusalem, so that in that place the preaching of the Gospel might be 
first confirmed, lest in going to foreign parts they should become easy prey for 
slander, and because it was necessary for them to be equipped, like soldiers, 
with the weapons of the Spirit, and go thus into battle against the enemies of 
Christ. When the time for the Ascension was at hand, He led them forth to the 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Mount of Olives (it is called by this name, because it was planted with a great 
many olive trees), and conversed with them about His proclamation to the ends 
of the earth, and also about His perpetual Kingdom to come. When He saw 
that they were going to ask Him what they should do, and since His immaculate 
Mother was also present there, He drew their attention to the angels, who 
indicated His ascent to heaven. And while they beheld, He was taken up from 
their midst, and a cloud received Him out of their sight. Being thus escorted by 
the angels, who exhorted each other to lift up the heavenly gates and were 
astonished that His flesh was reddened with blood, He ascended and sat at the 
right hand of the Father, deifying the flesh, and - I make bold to say - putting it 
on a level with God. For through the flesh we were reconciled to God and the 
ancient enmity was destroyed. The angels stood before the apostles in the form 
of men, saying: “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye in amazement, gazing up into 
heaven? This Jesus, Whom ye saw as God in the flesh, will come again thus, 
that is, in the flesh; save not as before, in poverty and gentleness, but with great 
glory, as ye behold Him now escorted by angels.” Then the apostles, wearied by 
their gazing, returned from the Mount of Olives. This is very close to Jerusalem, 
by a distance of two thousand and forty paces. This is the Way of the Sabbath. 
Thus was it enjoined on Moses to walk so many paces on the Sabbath, because 
this was the distance from the Tabernacle of witness to the camp of the Jews. It 
was permitted for worshippers to go out there on the Sabbath, but not to 
extend their journey any further. For this reason it was called the Way of the 
Sabbath. Hence, it seems to some that the Ascension of Christ took place on 
the Sabbath, but this is rather improbable. When they returned, the apostles 
went up to the upper room, in which they remained, together with the Myrrh-
Bearing Women and the Mother of the Word, occupying themselves in fasting, 
prayer, and supplications and awaiting the advent of the all-holy Spirit, 
according to the promise. 
O Christ our God, Who didst ascend in glory,  
have mercy on us. Amen 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Thou Who wast taken up on a cloud of light didst save the world, O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
O Christ, having taken upon Thy shoulders our nature, which had gone 
astray, Thou didst ascend and bring it unto God the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Thou Who didst ascend in the flesh unto the bodiless Father, O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having raised our nature, which was deadened by sin, Thou didst bring it 
unto Thine own Father, O Savior. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, thereby making her the 
Theotokos, O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
A radiant cloud caught Thee up, Who art light, and took Thee up from the 
earth in a manner transcending our understanding. And the heavenly multitudes 
praised Thee together with the apostles, saying: O God, blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us all clap our hands as we rejoice on the Ascension of Christ, and let us 
cry out in jubilation: The Lord is gone up with the voice of the trumpet, and 
since He is equal in rank, He is seated at the right hand of the Father 
throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., The great Moses of old, while chanting, cried out: Let the angels of 
heaven worship Christ Who ariseth as the King of all. To Him let us cry: O 
Lord and God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou. 
 Both now ..., O Strange wonders! How didst thou, O divinely joyous One, 
contain the uncontainable God, Who hath become poor according to the flesh, 
and was taken up with great glory unto the heavens today, quickening man? 
Katavasia: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor 
the lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the 
Comforter * doth inspire to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * 
equal in might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 19 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father * 
hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O ye 
priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Christ, the Giver of life, Who in two essences hath risen into the 
heavens with glory and sitteth together with the Father, O ye priests hymn, and 
ye peoples supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Thee, O Savior, Who didst deliver creation from slavery to the idols, 
and didst present it free unto Thine own Father, do we give praise, and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Him Who by His descent destroyed the adversary, and Who by His 
ascent raised up mankind give praise; O ye priests, hymn, and ye peoples, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Thou hast proved to be more excellent than the cherubim, O 
pure Theotokos, since thou hast carried in thy womb Him that rideth upon 
them. Together with the bodiless ones, we mortals glorify Him throughout all 
ages. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The intelligences appeared unto the apostles at the Ascension and said: Why 
stand ye gazing in astonishment? He that goeth up into the heavens shall come 
again to judge men upon earth, since He is the only Judge. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us render majesty unto God, let us cry out with one accord in jubilation 
of praise, let us sing, dance, and clap our hands. Our God is gone up from earth 
into the heavens, as the angels and Archangels praise Him as the Master and 
Creator of all things. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Our nature, which fell of old, hath been raised up exceedingly higher than 
the angels, and hath been placed on the throne of God in a manner 
transcending understanding. Come, let us make festival and cry out: O ye 
works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
 Both now ..., Behold, thy Son despoiled death by His Cross and arose on 
the third day, O Theotokos; and having manifested Himself unto His disciples, 
He hastened up unto the heavens. As we venerate thee with Him, we offer 
praise and glorification throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
ODE IX 
The Magnificat and “More honorable than the cherubim” are not sung, but 
before the Irmos and the Troparia we sing the Megalynarion: 
 Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who 
ascended from earth to heaven. 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
As the apostles beheld Thee, Christ God, the Redeemer of the world, being 
exalted in a manner befitting God, they magnified Thee with awe as they leapt 
for joy. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Beholding Thy deified flesh on high, O Christ, the angels beckoned to one 
another: Truly this is our God. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
As the orders of the Bodiless saw Thee being lifted up in the clouds, O 
Christ God, they cried: Lift up the gates for the King of Glory. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Thee, Who didst descend unto the utmost depths of the earth, and Who 
didst save man and exalt him by Thine Ascension, do we magnify. 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ God. As thou didst 
behold ascending from the earth Him Whom thou didst conceive, thou didst 
magnify Him together with the angels. 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Refrain: Beholding the ascent of the Master, * the angels were filled with 
awe, ** seeing how He was upborne from earth with glory into the 
heavens. 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the 
holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-virgin. 
Refrain: Beholding the ascent of the Master, * the angels were filled with 
awe, ** seeing how He was upborne from earth with glory into the 
heavens. 
O what gifts that surpass understanding! O dread mystery! For He Who 
reigneth over all hath risen from earth to the heavens, and unto the disciples 
hath He sent the Holy Spirit, Who enlightened their minds and made them fiery 
with grace. 
Refrain: Beholding the ascent of the Master, * the angels were filled with 
awe, ** seeing how He was upborne from earth with glory into the 
heavens. 
To the ranks of the disciples did the Lord say: Tarry ye in Jerusalem, and I 
will send you another Comforter, Who is equal in rank to the Father, and in 
honor to Me, Whom ye behold being taken up and riding upon a radiant cloud. 
Refrain: Beholding the ascent of the Master, * the angels were filled with 
awe, ** seeing how He was upborne from earth with glory into the 
heavens. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
The majesty of Him Who became poor in the flesh hath been manifestly 
taken up above the heavens; and our fallen nature hath been honored by sitting 
with the Father. Let us all make feast, and with one accord let us cry out with 
jubilation and clap our hands rejoicing. 
Refrain: Beholding the ascent of the Master, * the angels were filled with 
awe, ** seeing how He was upborne from earth with glory into the 
heavens. 
The Light Who shone forth from the Light hath dawned forth from thee, O 
all-immaculate one, and He hath dispelled all the darkness of godlessness and 
enlightened those who sleep in the night. Wherefore, as is due, we all ever call 
thee blessed throughout the ages. 
Katavasia: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord we glorify thee. 
Exapostilarion, Tone III: 
While Thy disciples looked on Thee, Thou didst ascend, * O Christ, unto 
the Father to sit beside Him. * angels hastened, running on before, and cried: * 
Lift ye the gates up, lift them up; * for the King hath ascended ** unto His 
bright primal glory.  
Glory ..., While Thy disciples looked on ..., 
Both now ..., While Thy disciples looked on ..., 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
Let us who are in the world now keep feast angelically, * and unto God 
Who rideth upon His throne of glory * let us all cry while chanting thus: * Holy 
art Thou, God the heavenly Father, * and Holy art Thou also, the co-eternal 
Word; ** and Holy art Thou O all-holy Spirit.  
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Repeat: Let us that are in the world now ...,  
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Perceiving Thy strange ascent, O Savior, * the leaders of the angels were 
bewildered, * and spake one unto another: What sight is this! * He that is seen is 
endowed with the likeness of mankind’s form, * yet as the incarnate God He 
now ascendeth ** far above the bounds of heaven’s heights. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
As they beheld Thee ascending in body from Olivet, O Word of God, * the 
blessed Galileans heard angels crying to them: * Why do ye stand thus and 
gaze? * For in this very flesh and form * He shall return once again upon the 
last day ** in like manner as ye see Him now. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Thou wast born as Thou Thyself didst will; * Thou didst appear of Thine 
own choice; * Thou didst suffer in the flesh, O our God. * Thou didst arise 
from the dead, trampling down death; * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Thou 
Who fillest all things, * and didst send unto us the divine Spirit, ** that we may 
praise and glorify Thy Divinity. 
The Great Doxology  
 Dismissal Troparion of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
AT LITURGY 
The First Antiphon in Tone II: 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: For the Lord Most High is terrible, * a great King over all the 
earth. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: He hath subdued peoples under us, * and nations under our feet. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
  
The Second Antiphon, in Tone II: 
Verse: Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, * in the city of our 
God, in His holy mountain. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst ascend in glory, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: The mountains of Zion on the sides of the north, * the city of the 
great King. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst ascend in glory, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: God is known in her towers, * when he cometh to help her. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst ascend in glory, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: For lo, the kings of the earth were assembled; * they came 
together. 
Refrain: O Son of God Who didst ascend in glory, save us who sing to 
Thee: Alleluia. 
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
O only-begotten Son and Word of God, * Who art immortal, * yet didst 
deign for our salvation * to be incarnate of the Holy Theotokos and Ever-
Virgin Mary, * and without change didst become man, * and was crucified, O 
Christ God, * trampling down death by death. * Thou Who art one of the Holy 
Trinity, ** glorified with the Father and the Holy Spirit, save us.  
 
The Third Antiphon 
Verse: Hear this, all ye nations; give ear, all ye that inhabit the world. 
Troparion, in Tone IV: Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * 
having gladdened Thy disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; *and they 
were assured by the blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer 
of the world. 
Verse: Both ye that are born of earth, and ye sons of men, rich and poor 
together. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart 
shall be of understanding. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: I will incline mine ear unto a parable, I will unfold my problem on 
the psaltery.  
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
 The entry verse: (Introit) 
 God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the trumpet. 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
The Kontakion of the feast, in Tone VI: 
 Glory..., Both now ..., When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our 
sake, * uniting things on earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O 
Christ our God, * departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * 
and crying unto them that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be 
against you. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
The Prokeimenon in Tone VII: Be Thou exalted above the heavens, * O 
God, and Thy glory above all the earth. 
Verse: Ready is my heart, O God, ready is my heart; I will sing and chant 
in my glory. 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (1:1-12) 
The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both 
to do and teach, Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through 
the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had 
chosen: To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many 
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things 
pertaining to the kingdom of God: And, being assembled together with them, 
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the 
promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. For John truly 
baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many 
days hence. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, 
Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? And he said 
unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father 
hath put in his own power. But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy 
Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, 
and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. And 
when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a 
cloud received him out of their sight. And while they looked stedfastly toward 
heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; Which 
also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same 
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as 
ye have seen him go into heaven. Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the 
mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day’s journey. 
Alleluia in Tone II: 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (24:36-53) 
At that time, Jesus having arisen from the dead, stood in the midst of His 
disciples and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. But they were terrified and 
affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them, 
Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my 
hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not 
flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he shewed 
them his hands and his feet. And while they yet believed not for joy, and 
wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat? And they gave him a 
piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he took it, and did eat before 
them. And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, 
while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in 
the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. Then 
opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures, And 
said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to 
rise from the dead the third day: And that repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And 
ye are witnesses of these things. And, behold, I send the promise of my Father 
upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power 
from on high. And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his 
hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was 
parted from them, and carried up into heaven. And they worshipped him, and 
returned to Jerusalem with great joy: And were continually in the temple, 
praising and blessing God. Amen. 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of the First 
Canon of the feast, in Tone V: 
Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Communion Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice 
of the trumpet. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
  
In some Liturgical traditions, the Troparion of the Feast is chanted in 
place of “We have seen the true light ...,”: 
