--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning. The 18th Kathisma.  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thou didst suffer as a man, * though as God Thou art unapproachable. * 
Thou didst arise on the third day despoiling death, * and didst raise up all those 
who had reposed in corruption. * And having ascended unto Thy Father, O 
Christ, * Thou didst promise that Thou wouldst send the Comforter * to Thy 
sacred apostles, ** O Almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls. 
Why stand ye gazing into the heavens? * said the angels in human form, 
unto the Word’s initiates: * He Whom ye beheld ascending on a cloud of light, * 
shall in a like manner come again * to judge the world, as He Himself told you. 
** Therefore, go ye forth and accomplish all that He hath said. 
Having arisen from the tomb in a manner transcending thought, * O 
almighty Lord, * Thou didst lead to Bethany Thy beloved ones. * And having 
arrived at the Mount of Olives, O Word, * Thou didst bless them all. * And 
Thou wast taken up from thence * Whilst angels ministered unto Thee, O 
Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Today the hosts on high, beholding our nature in the heavens * marvel at 
the strange manner of its ascent, * and, being perplexed, * they said one to 
another: * Who is this that cometh? * And when they saw that it was their own 
Master, * they were commanded to lift up the heavenly gates, * Who again shalt 
come from thence in the flesh, ** as the Judge of all and the Almighty God. 
 
“O joyous light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise 
up against me redeem me. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Feast, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
Having fulfilled His will, * thus pleasing well the Father, * Thou didst 
ascend in glory. * The things of heaven didst Thou unite thus ** with the things 
of earth. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
O merciful One, * Thou didst ascend unto Thy Father, * from Whom Thou 
wast not parted, and didst exalt * our nature thus which lay prostrate, ** O 
Lord. 
Verse. God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
A brilliant cloud of light * conveyed Thee to the heavens, * whilst with great 
fear and trembling * the angels came and ministered unto ** Thy divine 
Ascension. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
Unto the Mount of Olives didst Thou come, * Thou Who hast mercy on 
the race of mankind. * And a cloud took Thee up out of the sight of Thy 
disciples, * who, on one hand, trembled because of that which they beheld, * 
and, on the other hand, rejoiced * at their expectation of the Holy Spirit, * 
wherein do Thou make us steadfast, O Savior, ** and have mercy on us. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Thou hast ascended ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., Thou hast 
ascended ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy upon us ...,  
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God Who didst ascend in Glory from us into 
heaven and sit at the right hand of the Father, ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
SATURDAY IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. (Twice) 
Glory ..., From the Menaion, Both now ..., Thou hast ascended ..., 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XVI) The following Sessional Hymn: 
of the Feast, in Tone I: 
While angels gazed with wonder upon Thy dread Ascension, * and while the 
disciples were awestruck as Thou wast taken from earth, * O Savior, as God 
Thou didst ascend in glory * while the gates were raised for Thee. * For this 
cause then the Hosts of the heavens cried out, * while marveling in amazement: 
* Glory to Thy descent, O Savior Christ. * Glory to Thy Kingdom’s 
sovereignty. * Glory be to Thine Ascension, ** O Thou only Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XVII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Having despoiled Hades O Life-giver, * and having enlightened the world 
by Thine arising, * Thou didst ascend on high in glory O Savior, * Thou Who 
bearest all things in Thy hand. * For this cause, we with the angels, glorify Thee 
O Almighty Lord: * Glory to Thine Ascension, O Christ. * Glory to Thy 
kingdom. * Glory to Thy compassion, ** O Thou only Lover of mankind.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th psalm. For the Canons: The 2nd Canon of the Feast in Tone 
IV, with its Irmos to make eight in each Ode, and from the Menaion to make 
four in each Ode. After the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional 
Hymn from the Menaion, Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the 
Feast. After the sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast. The 
Exapostilarion of the feast. The Canon, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou Who art immortal by nature didst arise on the third day, and didst 
appear unto the eleven and all the disciples, and riding upon a cloud, didst 
hasten back unto the Father, O Thou Creator of all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The God-inspired David cried out, chanting most plainly: The Lord hath 
ascended into the heavens in jubilation and with the voice of the trumpet, 
reaching even unto the Father, the Source of light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Lord, by Thy Passion and Thy Resurrection Thou didst renew the world, 
which had grown old in many sins; and riding upon a cloud, Thou didst ascend 
into the heavens. Glory be to Thy glory. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O all-immaculate Lady, thou didst conceive the Master of all, 
Who willingly submitted to the Passion and went up unto His Father, Whom 
He had not left, though He had taken on flesh. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod 
through the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him 
alone let us sing: * For He is glorified. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Lift ye up the gates of heaven, behold, Christ the King and Lord is come, 
wearing a body of clay; thus spake the powers below to those on high. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having sought out Adam, who had been deceived by the guile of the 
serpent, Thou, being clothed with Adam’s nature, didst ascend and sit at the 
right hand of the Father, being of equal rank with Him; and the angels praised 
Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The earth doth celebrate and dance for joy, and heaven doth rejoice today 
on the Ascension of the Maker of creation, Who by His own will clearly united 
that which was separated. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Since thou hast given birth to God Who destroyed death and 
Who alone is immortal, O all-pure Virgin Mother, do thou ever entreat Him to 
slay the passions that slay me and to save me. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make 
steadfast mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy 
saving Ascension. 
Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn from the Menaion,  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Having mounted upon heaven’s clouds, O Christ, * Thou didst leave peace 
unto those upon the earth; * and Thou didst ascend and sit at the Father’s right 
hand on high, * since Thou art one in essence with Him, and the Spirit, O Lord; 
* for though Thou hadst appeared in the flesh, without undergoing change. * 
Wherefore Thou dost now wait till the last consummation, * when Thou shalt 
return to judge all of mankind upon the earth. * O Thou most righteous Judge 
and Lord, * since Thou art a greatly merciful God, * do Thou spare our souls 
and do Thou grant to us, Thy lowly servants, ** the pardon of our failings and 
our sins. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus 
the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he 
hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Jesus, the Giver of life, taking those whom He loved, went up on the Mount 
of Olives, and blessed them; and riding on a cloud, He came to the Father’s 
bosom, which He had in no wise left. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The whole world both visible and invisible, doth celebrate. angels and 
mortals leap for joy, unceasingly glorifying the Ascension of Him Who of His 
goodness was united to us in the flesh. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having destroyed the dominion of death since Thou art the immortal Lord, 
Thou didst grant immortality unto all, O Lover of mankind; and Thou wast 
taken up in glory, while the august disciples watched Thee, O Almighty Jesus. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Thy womb is become blessed, O all-immaculate one; for in an 
inexplicable manner thou wast deemed worthy to behold Him that marvelously 
emptied the belly of Hades. Entreat Him to save us who praise thee. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: I heard the rumor of the power of the cross * that paradise is 
opened thereby * and I cried out aloud saying: * Glory to Thy power, * O 
Lord. 
ODE V 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God 
of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all 
who hymn thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having put death to death by Thy death, O Lord, Thou didst take those 
whom Thou didst love and didst ascend the holy Mount of Olives, and from 
thence, riding upon a cloud, Thou didst hasten up unto Thy Father, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Strange is Thy birth, strange is Thy Resurrection, strange and awesome, O 
Giver of life, is Thy divine Ascension from the mountain, which Elijah 
portrayed when he arose on a four-horsed chariot, as he praised Thee, O Lover 
of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The angels spake unto the apostles as they looked on: O ye men of Galilee, 
why marvel ye at the Ascension of Christ, the Giver of life? He shall come again 
unto the earth to judge the whole world, since He is a most righteous Judge. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Having preserved thee as a virgin uncorrupted after childbirth, 
Christ went up to the Father, Whom He had not left, O Birthgiver of God, 
though by His ineffable mercy He had received from thee flesh endowed with 
both intelligence and life. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for 
Thou art our God; * we know none other besides Thee. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * 
O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let the clouds sprinkle upon us eternal joy from above; for riding upon a 
cloud as upon the cherubim, Christ is gone up unto His Father today. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having appeared in the likeness of the flesh, Thou didst gather together into 
one the things that were formerly separated, O Lover of mankind. And while 
the disciples were watching, O compassionate One, Thou wast taken up unto 
the heavens. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Why are His garments red Who is united to the grossness of the flesh? The 
holy angels, on seeing Christ, extolled Him Who bare the divine symbols of the 
venerable Passion. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: We praise thy conception, O maiden; we praise thine ineffable 
birthgiving, whereby we were delivered from the destruction and misfortune 
and gloomy confinement in Hades, O pure one. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath 
become my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and 
Thy right hand saved me, O Lord. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VI:  
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
Ikos: Leaving the things of earth upon the earth, and surrendering to the 
earth things of ashes, come, let us come to our senses and raise our eyes and 
thoughts on high; let us, O mortals, turn our gaze together with our senses up 
unto the heavenly gates. Let us consider ourselves present at the Mount of 
Olives, and gaze intently at the Redeemer who is riding upon a cloud; for the 
Lord hath hastened up from there into the heavens. And there the bountiful 
Giver of gifts distributed gifts unto His apostles, calling to them as a Father, 
and strengthening them; He guided them like Sons and said unto them: I am 
not separated from you; I am with you, and no one can be against you. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
A radiant cloud caught Thee up, Who art light, and took Thee up from the 
earth in a manner transcendng our understanding. And the heavenly multitudes 
praised Thee together with the apostles, saying: O God, blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us all clap our hands as we rejoice on the Ascension of Christ, and let us 
cry out in jubilation: The Lord is gone up with the voice of the trumpet, and 
since He is equal in rank, He is seated at the right hand of the Father 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The great Moses of old, while chanting, cried out: Let the angels of heaven 
worship Christ Who ariseth as the King of all. To Him let us cry: O Lord and 
God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Strange wonders! How didst thou, O divinely joyous One, 
contain the uncontainable God, Who hath become poor according to the flesh, 
and was taken up with great glory unto the heavens today, quickening man? 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The intelligences appeared unto the apostles at the Ascension and said: Why 
stand ye gazing in astonishment? He that goeth up into the heavens shall come 
again to judge men upon earth, since He is the only Judge. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Let us render majesty unto God, let us cry out with one accord in jubilation 
of praise, let us sing, dance, and clap our hands. Our God is gone up from earth 
into the heavens, as the angels and Archangels praise Him as the Master and 
Creator of all things. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Our nature, which fell of old, hath been raised up exceedingly higher than 
the angels, and hath been placed on the throne of God in a manner 
transcending understanding. Come, let us make festival and cry out: O ye 
works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Behold, thy Son despoiled death by His Cross and arose on the 
third day, O Theotokos; and having manifested Himself unto His disciples, He 
hastened up unto the heavens. As we venerate thee with Him, we offer praise 
and glorification throughout all ages. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father 
* hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O 
ye priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages.  
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the 
holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-virgin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O what gifts that surpass understanding! O dread mystery! For He Who 
reigneth over all hath risen from earth to the heavens, and unto the disciples 
hath He sent the Holy Spirit, Who enlightened their minds and made them fiery 
with grace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
To the ranks of the disciples did the Lord say: Tarry ye in Jerusalem, and I 
will send you another Comforter, Who is equal in rank to the Father, and in 
honor to Me, Whom ye behold being taken up and riding upon a radiant cloud. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The majesty of Him Who became poor in the flesh hath been manifestly 
taken up above the heavens; and our fallen nature hath been honored by sitting 
with the Father. Let us all make feast, and with one accord let us cry out with 
jubilation and clap our hands rejoicing. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: The Light Who shone forth from the Light hath dawned forth 
from thee, O all-immaculate one, and He hath dispelled all the darkness of 
godlessness and enlightened those who sleep in the night. Wherefore, as is due, 
we all ever call thee blessed throughout the ages. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Exapostilarion: 
While Thy disciples looked on Thee, Thou didst ascend, * O Christ, unto 
the Father to sit beside Him. * angels hastened, running on before, and cried: * 
Lift ye the gates up, lift them up; * for the King hath ascended ** unto His 
bright primal glory. 
Glory ..., (From the Menaion if there is one) Both now ..., While Thy ..., 
On the Praises, The usual Psalm, if there are Stichera for the Praises 
from the Menaion they are included. After the chanting of the Praises: 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
The Lord said to His friends: * I shall not leave as orphans * all you whom I 
have gathered; * but rather I shall send forth the Holy Spirit ** unto you. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
The angels cried and said * unto the wise apostles: * O righteous Galileans, 
* He shall return in like manner as ye see ** Him now depart. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
As they descended from * that hallowed Mount of Olives, * O Word, Thy 
blest * disciples extolled Thy dread Ascension ** while glorifying it with joy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thou wast taken up in glory from earth into the heavens, * Thou Who dost 
fill all things with Thy Divinity; * and Thou didst sit down at the right hand of 
the Father, * Thou Who in the beginning wast God the Word. * Wherefore, as 
the heavenly powers beheld, * they said unto the apostles with fear: * Why look 
ye, gazing up into the heavens? * He Whom ye have beheld, the Same shall 
come again with glory * to judge all the earth and to recompense * each 
according to his Works. * Let us cry unto Him: ** O incomprehensible Lord, 
glory be to Thee. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Thou hast ascended ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., Thou hast 
ascended ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God Who didst ascend in Glory from us into 
heaven and sit at the right hand of the Father, ..., 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
SATURDAY OF THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, at the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE III of the Canon, 
including the Irmos: 
By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast mine 
understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy saving Ascension. 
Thou didst go up unto the Father, O Life-giving Christ, and Thou didst 
exalt our race by Thine ineffable compassion, O Lover of mankind. 
The orders of angels, O Savior, on beholding man’s nature going up 
together with Thee, were amazed and ceaselessly praised Thee. 
The choirs of angels were amazed, O Christ, as they beheld thee taken up 
with Thy body, and they praised Thy holy Ascension. 
Glory ..., The earth doth celebrate and dance for joy, and heaven doth 
rejoice today on the Ascension of the Maker of creation, Who by His volition 
clearly united that which was separated. 
 Both now ..., Since thou hast given birth to God Who destroyed death and 
Who alone is immortal, O all-pure Virgin Mother, do thou ever entreat Him to 
slay the passions that slay me and to save me. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion ofthe Feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; *and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VII: Be Thou exalted above the heavens, * O 
God, and Thy glory above all the earth. 
Verse: Ready is my heart, O God, ready is my heart; I will sing and chant 
in my glory. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (20:7-12) 
In those days: it being the first day of the week, the disciples came together 
to break bread, and Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; 
and continued his speech until midnight. And there were many lights in the 
upper chamber, where they were gathered together. And there sat in a window a 
certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul 
was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, 
and was taken up dead. And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing 
him said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him. When he therefore was 
come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even 
till break of day, so he departed. And they brought the young man alive, and 
were not a little comforted. 
Alleluia in Tone II: 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (14:1 - 11) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: The words that I speak unto you I speak 
not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Believe 
me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very 
works’ sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works 
that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go 
unto my Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the 
Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will 
do it. If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and 
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Even 
the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, 
neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be 
in you. I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. Yet a little while, 
and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also. 
At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. He 
that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he 
that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will 
manifest myself to him. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of the 
First Canon of the feast, in Tone V: 
 Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
 
Communion Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice 
of the trumpet. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
  
 
