--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING IN THE SEVENTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS  
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning. The 6th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Thou didst suffer as a man, * though as God Thou art unapproachable. * 
Thou didst arise on the third day despoiling death, * and didst raise up all those 
who had reposed in corruption. * And having ascended unto Thy Father, O 
Christ, * Thou didst promise that Thou wouldst send the Comforter * to Thy 
sacred apostles, ** O Almighty Jesus, Thou Savior of our souls. 
Why stand ye gazing into the heavens? * said the angels in human form, 
unto the Word’s initiates: * He Whom ye beheld ascending on a cloud of light, * 
shall in a like manner come again * to judge the world, as He Himself told you. 
** Therefore, go ye forth and accomplish all that He hath said. 
Having arisen from the tomb in a manner transcending thought, * O 
almighty Lord, * Thou didst lead to Bethany Thy beloved ones. * And having 
arrived at the Mount of Olives, O Word, * Thou didst bless them all. * And 
Thou wast taken up from thence * Whilst angels ministered unto Thee, O 
Almighty Jesus, ** Thou Savior of our souls. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
When Thou, O Christ, * didst come unto the Mount of Olives * to 
accomplish the good will of the Father, * the heavenly angels were amazed * 
and the nethermost regions shuddered with fear. * The disciples stood by with 
joy and trembling * as Thou spakest unto them, * and a cloud prepared as a 
throne awaited opposite them; * and heaven, throwing open the gates, shone 
with comeliness; * and the earth revealeth its hidden chambers, * that the 
descent and immediate ascent might be made known unto Adam; * but his 
steps were led upwards as it were by a hand, * and his mouth was heard blessing 
Thee greatly; * the cloud took Thee up and heaven received Thee within itself. * 
Thou hast wrought this great and strange deed, O Lord, ** for the salvation of 
our souls. 
“O joyous light ...,” 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou 
didst hearken unto me. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the following Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Having fulfilled His will, * thus pleasing well the Father, * Thou didst 
ascend in glory. * The things of heaven didst Thou unite thus ** with the things 
of earth. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
O Merciful One, Thou didst ascend * unto Thy Father, * from Whom Thou 
wast not parted, * and didst exalt our nature thus which lay prostrate, ** O our 
Lord. 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
A brilliant cloud of light * conveyed Thee to the heavens, * whilst with great 
fear and trembling * the angels came and ministered unto ** Thy divine 
command. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Thou hast renewed in Thyself Adam’s nature, * which had gone down into 
the lower parts of the earth, * and Thou didst raise it up above every 
principality and authority today. * For since Thou didst love it, Thou didst seat 
it together with Thyself; * since Thou hast taken compassion on it, Thou didst 
unite it to Thyself; * since Thou didst unite it to Thyself, Thou didst suffer with 
it; * and enduring the Passion, though Thou art impassable, * Thou didst glorify 
it. * But the Bodiless ones said: Who is this comely man? * But not only is He 
man, but God and man; * that which is manifest is twofold. * Wherefore, beside 
themselves, * the angels, flying about clad in radiant vesture, * cried unto the 
disciples: Ye men of Galilee, * He that is gone from you, * Jesus, Man and God, 
* shall come again as the God-man to judge the living and the dead; * and He 
granteth unto the faithful ** the forgiveness of sins and great mercy. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Thou hast ascended ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both now ..., Thou hast 
ascended ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God Who didst ascend in Glory from us into 
heaven and sit at the right hand of the Father, ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TUESDAY IN THE SEVENTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., Thou hast ascended ..., 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VII) The following Sessional Hymn 
of the Feast, in Tone II: 
Thou hast descended unto us from the heights unto the earth, * and Thou 
hast ascended from earth up to the heights again unto Thy Father, * Thy 
disciples beholding thine ascent. * And with them we now celebrate and praise 
Thine Ascension, ** O our Savior.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VIII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
The beginningless Word, Who existed before all ages, * and Who took 
man’s nature upon Himself, * and having mystically deified it, * ascended on 
this day. * Hence, the angels hastened before the apostles, * to show Him 
ascending into the heavens with great glory. * And as they worshipped Him, 
they cried aloud saying: ** Glory be to God Who hath been taken up. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, the first Canon of the Feast in Tone V 
with its Irmos to make eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in 
each Ode. After the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn from 
the Menaion Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the Ascension. After 
the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Ascension. After the Ninth ODE 
the Exapostilarion of the Ascension, Glory ..., Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Ascension. The Canon in Tone V: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod through 
the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us 
sing: * For He is glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
O all ye peoples, let us sing a song of victory unto Christ, Who is taken up 
with glory upon the shoulders of the cherubim, and Who hath seated us 
together with Himself at the right hand of the Fathers; for He is glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Beholding Christ, the Mediator between God and man, with His flesh in the 
heights, the choirs of the angels were amazed, and with one accord they sang a 
hymn of victory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us all sing unto God, Who was seen upon Mount Sinai, and Who gave 
the Law unto Moses, the seer of God, and Who ascended from the Mount of 
Olives in the flesh, for He is glorified. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
O most pure Mother of God, do thou unceasingly intercede with Him Who 
assumed flesh from thee, yet was not separated from the bosom of the Father, 
that He save from every danger those whom He hath fashioned. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod 
through the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him 
alone let us sing: * For He is glorified. 
ODE III 
Irmos: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast 
mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy saving 
Ascension. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou didst go up unto the Father, O Life-giving Christ, and Thou didst 
exalt our race by Thine ineffable compassion, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The orders of angels, O Savior, on beholding man’s nature ascending 
together with Thee, were amazed and ceaselessly praised Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The choirs of angels were amazed, O Christ, as they beheld thee taken up 
with Thy body, and they praised Thy holy Ascension. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou didst raise up human nature which had fallen into corruption, O 
Christ, and in Thine Ascension Thou didst exalt us and glorify us together with 
Thyself. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Unceasingly entreat Him Who came forth from thy loins, O 
pure one, that those who praise thee as the Mother of God may be delivered 
from the deception of the devil. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make 
steadfast mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy 
saving Ascension. 
Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn from the Menaion,  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Having mounted upon heaven’s clouds, O Christ, * Thou didst leave peace 
unto those upon the earth; * and Thou didst ascend and sit at the Father’s right 
hand on high, * since Thou art one in essence with Him, and the Spirit, O Lord; 
* for though Thou hadst appeared in the flesh, without undergoing change. * 
Wherefore Thou dost now wait till the last consummation, * when Thou shalt 
return to judge all of mankind upon the earth. * O Thou most righteous Judge 
and Lord, * since Thou art a greatly merciful God, * do Thou spare our souls 
and do Thou grant to us, Thy lowly servants, ** the pardon of our failings and 
our sins. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I heard the rumor of the power of the cross * that paradise is 
opened thereby * and I cried out aloud saying: * Glory to Thy power, * O 
Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou wast taken up in glory, O King of the angels, that Thou mightest send 
us the Comforter from the Father. Wherefore we cry: Glory to Thine 
Ascension, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the Savior ascended in the flesh unto the Father, the arrays of the angels 
were astonished at Him and cried aloud: Glory to Thine Ascension, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
The hosts of the angels cried unto those above: Lift up the gates for Christ 
our King; Him do we praise together with the Father and the Spirit. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: The Virgin gave birth without the experience of those things 
that pertain to motherhood. But though she was a mother, she remained a 
virgin; wherefore praising her, we cry: Rejoice, O Theotokos. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: I heard the rumor of the power of the cross * that paradise is 
opened thereby * and I cried out aloud saying: * Glory to Thy power, * O 
Lord. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou 
art our God; * we know none other besides Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having filled all things with joy, O Merciful One, Thou didst come in Thy 
flesh unto the hosts on high. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the hosts of angels saw Thee being lifted up, they cried aloud: Lift ye the 
gates for our King. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the apostles beheld the Savior being lifted up on high, they cried with 
trembling: Glory be to Thee, O our King. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: We praise thee as a Virgin after childbirth, O Theotokos; for 
thou didst conceive God the Word in the flesh for the sake of the world. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for 
Thou art our God; * we know none other besides Thee. 
 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become 
my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and Thy 
right hand saved me, O Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
In their hope for the coming of the Spirit, the apostles leapt for joy as they 
beheld on high the Creator being lifted up, and they cried out with fear: Glory 
be to Thine ascent. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The angels came and cried unto Thy disciples, O Christ: In like manner as 
ye see Christ going up, so shall He, the righteous Judge of all, come in the flesh. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the hosts of heaven saw Thee, our Savior, being taken up into the heights 
together with Thy body, they cried out, saying: Great is Thy love for mankind, 
O Master. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Thou bush un-burnt, and mountain and living ladder, and 
gate of heaven, we glorify thee as is meet, O glorious Mary, thou boast of the 
Orthodox. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath 
become my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and 
Thy right hand saved me, O Lord. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VI:  
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
Ikos: Leaving the things of earth upon the earth, and surrendering to the 
earth things of ashes, come, let us come to our senses and raise our eyes and 
thoughts on high; let us, O mortals, turn our gaze together with our senses up 
unto the heavenly gates. Let us consider ourselves present at the Mount of 
Olives, and gaze intently at the Redeemer who is riding upon a cloud; for the 
Lord hath hastened up from there into the heavens. And there the bountiful 
Giver of gifts distributed gifts unto His apostles, calling to them as a Father, 
and strengthening them; He guided them like Sons and said unto them: I am 
not separated from you; I am with you, and no one can be against you. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Thou Who wast taken up on a cloud of light didst save the world, O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Christ, having taken upon Thy shoulders our nature, which had gone 
astray, Thou didst ascend and bring it unto God the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Thou Who didst ascend in the flesh unto the bodiless Father, O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having raised our nature, which was deadened by sin, Thou didst bring it 
unto Thine own Father, O Savior. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, thereby making her the 
Theotokos, O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father * 
hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O ye 
priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Christ, the Giver of life, Who in two essences hath risen into the 
heavens with glory and sitteth together with the Father, O ye priests hymn, and 
ye peoples supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Thee, O Savior, Who didst deliver creation from slavery to the idols, 
and didst present it free unto Thine own Father, do we give praise, and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Him Who by His descent destroyed the adversary, and Who by His 
ascent raised up mankind give praise; O ye priests, hymn, and ye peoples, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Thou hast proved to be more excellent than the cherubim, O 
pure Theotokos, since thou hast carried in thy womb Him that rideth upon 
them. Together with the bodiless ones, we mortals glorify Him throughout all 
ages. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father 
* hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O 
ye priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages.  
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the apostles beheld Thee, Christ God, the Redeemer of the world, being 
exalted in a manner befitting God, they magnified Thee with awe as they leapt 
for joy. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Beholding Thy deified flesh on high, O Christ, the angels beckoned to one 
another: Truly this is our God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the orders of the Bodiless saw Thee being lifted up in the clouds, O 
Christ God, they cried: Lift up the gates for the King of Glory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thee, Who didst descend unto the utmost depths of the earth, and Who 
didst save man and exalt him by Thine Ascension, do we magnify. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ God. As thou didst 
behold ascending from the earth Him Whom thou didst conceive, thou didst 
magnify Him together with the angels. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Katavasia: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Exapostilarion: 
While Thy disciples looked on Thee, Thou didst ascend, * O Christ, unto 
the Father to sit beside Him. * angels hastened, running on before, and cried: * 
Lift ye the gates up, lift them up; * for the King hath ascended ** unto His 
bright primal glory. 
Glory ..., (From the Menaion if there is one) Both now ..., While Thy ..., 
On the Praises, The usual Psalm, if there are Stichera for the Praises 
from the Menaion they are included. After the chanting of the Praises: 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
The Lord said unto His friends: * I shall not leave as orphans * all you 
whom I * have gathered; but rather I shall send forth ** the Holy Spirit unto 
you. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
The angels cried and said * unto the wise apostles: * O righteous Galileans, 
* He shall return * in like manner as ye see Him ** now depart. 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
As they descended from * that hallowed Mount of Olives, * O Word, Thy 
blest disciples * extolled * Thy dread Ascension ** while glorifying it with joy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
When Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ God, * while the disciples were 
watching, * the clouds took Thee up with Thy flesh; * the heavenly gates were 
lifted up; * the choir of the angels rejoiced with rejoicing; * the powers above 
cried out, saying: * Lift up thy gates, O ye princes, * and the King of Glory shall 
enter therein. * And the disciples were astonished and said: * Be Thou not 
parted from us, O Good Shepherd, ** but send unto us Thy most holy Spirit to 
guide and establish our souls. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., Thou hast ascended ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God Who didst ascend in Glory from us into 
heaven and sit at the right hand of the Father, ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
TUESDAY OF THE SEVENTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE VI of the Canon. 
The abyss hath encompassed me, the sea monster is become my grave; but I 
cried unto Thee, the Lover of mankind, and Thy right hand saved me, O Lord. 
In their hope for the coming of the Spirit, the apostles leapt for joy as they 
beheld on high the Creator being lifted up, and they cried out with fear: Glory 
be to Thine ascent. 
The angels came and cried unto Thy disciples, O Christ: In like manner as 
ye see Christ going up, so shall He, the righteous Judge of all, come in the flesh. 
As the hosts of heaven saw Thee, our Savior, being taken up into the heights 
together with Thy body, they cried out, saying: Great is Thy love for man, O 
Master. 
Glory ..., Why are His garments red Who is united to the grossness of the 
flesh? The holy angels, on seeing Christ, extolled Him Who bare the divine 
symbols of the venerable Passion. 
 Both now ..., We praise thy conception, O maiden; we praise thine ineffable 
birthgiving, whereby we were delivered from the destruction and misfortune 
and gloomy confinement in Hades, O pure one. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; *and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, and for the Saint, if 
there be any, Then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., of the Feast in Tone VI: 
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VII: Be Thou exalted above the heavens, * O 
God, and Thy glory above all the earth. 
Verse: Ready is my heart, O God, ready is my heart; I will sing and chant 
in my glory. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (21:26-32) 
In those days: Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with 
them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of 
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them. And 
when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia, when 
they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him, 
Crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man, that teacheth all men every 
where against the people, and the law, and this place: and further brought 
Greeks also into the temple, and hath polluted this holy place. (For they had 
seen before with him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed 
that Paul had brought into the temple.) And all the city was moved, and the 
people ran together: and they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple: and 
forthwith the doors were shut. And as they went about to kill him, tidings came 
unto the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar. Who 
immediately took soldiers and centurions, and ran down unto them: and when 
they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, they left beating of Paul. 
Alleluia, in Tone II: 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (16:2 - 13) 
The Lord said unto His disciples, the time shall come when whosoever 
killeth you will think that he doeth God service. And these things will they do 
unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. But these things 
have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told 
you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I 
was with you. But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you 
asketh me, Whither goest thou? But because I have said these things unto you, 
sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient 
for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto 
you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will 
reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: Of sin, 
because they believe not on me; Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, 
and ye see me no more; Of judgment, because the prince of this world is 
judged. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. 
Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of the 
First Canon of the feast, in Tone V: 
 Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
 
Communion Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice 
of the trumpet. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
  
 
