--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING IN THE SEVENTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning. The 12th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone IV: 
Having achieved the salvation of all mankind, * Thou didst go up to the 
Mount of Olives O Christ, * from whence Thou wast taken to heaven before 
Thy disciples, * being borne thither in glory. * Wherefore, amazed by the 
mystery, * the lower orders cried out unto the higher powers: * Lift ye up the 
gates, that the sovereign God of all may enter therein * from whence He had 
departed, as He had willed, ** to wondrously effect the salvation of the world. 
As the choir of the disciples’ looked upon Thee ascending, * they cried 
aloud: * O Master, why dost Thou leave Thy servants behind? * Whither dost 
Thou journey, * Thou Who holdest all of creation in Thy hands? * Behold, we 
have left all things to follow after Thee rejoicing, * with the hope that we would 
ever abide and dwell with Thee: * Leave us not orphaned, * but as Thou didst 
promise O compassionate Savior, ** send Thou the Comforter and Savior of 
our souls. 
As Thou didst grant a final blessing unto Thy friends O Master, * Thou 
didst teach them the mystery: * Behold O my Friends, I go to the Father, * I 
shall send forth unto you the Comforter. * I shall not leave my beloved sheep 
which I have gathered, * I shall not forget those on whom I bestowed my love. 
* Endowed with power of the Most High God, * ye shall go forth and preach 
unto all the world the good tidings, ** of the salvation of the race of mankind. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the trumpet, * to 
raise the fallen image of Adam, ** and to send the Comforting Spirit to sanctify 
our souls.  
Entrance, “O joyous Light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Feast, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
The Lord spake unto His friends * saying, I will not leave you * whom I 
have gathered * orphaned, but I will send unto you ** the Most-holy Spirit. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
The angels cried aloud * unto the most wise apostles * saying: O ye men of 
Galilee, * in such a manner as ye see Him ascend, ** so shall He come again. 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Descending from the Mount * of Olives with great joy, * Thy disciples O 
Word, * glorified, and hymned ** Thy divine Ascension. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Having ascended into the heavens, * from whence Thou didst also descend, 
* leave us not orphaned, O Lord; * let Thy Spirit come, bringing peace unto the 
world; * show Thou unto the sons of men the works of Thy might, ** O Lord 
and Lover of mankind.  
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., Thou hast ascended ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
THURSDAY IN THE SEVENTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., Thou hast ascended ..., 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIII) The following Sessional Hymn 
of the Feast, in Tone V: 
Having come down from heaven unto the things of earth, * O Christ, as 
God, with Thyself, Thou didst resurrect Adam’s form, * which lay prostrate in 
the nether holds of Hades’ vault; * in Thine Ascension to the heights * Thou 
didst lead it up unto the heavens and Thou didst seat it * upon the throne of 
Thy Father, ** since Thou, the Lover of mankind, art merciful. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIV) Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst go up upon the Mount of Olives, O merciful Jesus, * From 
whence Thou wast taken. * For a bright cloud received Thee from the earth, * 
as Thy disciples looked on in awe, * and the bodiless hosts on high heard the 
noetic leaders cry aloud: * Be ye lifted in fear, ye gates. * With them doth 
creation praise Thee, ** Who art the King and God of all things that be. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, the 1st Canon of the Feast in Tone V 
with its Irmos to make eight in each Ode, and of the Menaion to make four in 
each Ode. After the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn from 
the Menaion Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of the Ascension. After 
the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of the Ascension. After the Ninth ODE 
the Exapostilarion of the Ascension, Glory ..., Menaion, Both now ..., the 
Ascension. The Canon in Tone V: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod through 
the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us 
sing: * For He is glorified. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O all ye peoples, let us sing a song of victory unto Christ, Who is taken up 
with glory upon the shoulders of the cherubim, and Who hath seated us 
together with Himself at the right hand of the Fathers; for He is glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Beholding Christ, the Mediator between God and man, with His flesh in the 
heights, the choirs of the angels were amazed, and with one accord they sang a 
hymn of victory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us all sing unto God, Who was seen upon Mount Sinai, and Who gave 
the Law unto Moses, the seer of God, and Who ascended from the Mount of 
Olives in the flesh, for He is glorified. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
O most pure Mother of God, do thou unceasingly intercede with Him Who 
assumed flesh from thee, yet was not separated from the bosom of the Father, 
that He save from every danger those whom He hath fashioned. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Unto God the Savior Who made His people pass dryshod 
through the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him 
alone let us sing: * For He is glorified. 
ODE III 
Irmos: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast 
mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy saving 
Ascension. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou didst go up unto the Father, O Life-giving Christ, and Thou didst 
exalt our race by Thine ineffable compassion, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The orders of angels, O Savior, on beholding man’s nature ascending 
together with Thee, were amazed and ceaselessly praised Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The choirs of angels were amazed, O Christ, as they beheld thee taken up 
with Thy body, and they praised Thy holy Ascension. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thou didst raise up human nature which had fallen into corruption, O 
Christ, and in Thine Ascension Thou didst exalt us and glorify us together with 
Thyself. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Unceasingly entreat Him Who came forth from thy loins, O 
pure one, that those who praise thee as the Mother of God may be delivered 
from the deception of the devil. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make 
steadfast mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify * Thy 
saving Ascension. 
Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn from the Menaion,  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Having mounted upon heaven’s clouds, O Christ, * Thou didst leave peace 
unto those upon the earth; * and Thou didst ascend and sit at the Father’s right 
hand on high, * since Thou art one in essence with Him, and the Spirit, O Lord; 
* for though Thou hadst appeared in the flesh, without undergoing change. * 
Wherefore Thou dost now wait till the last consummation, * when Thou shalt 
return to judge all of mankind upon the earth. * O Thou most righteous Judge 
and Lord, * since Thou art a greatly merciful God, * do Thou spare our souls 
and do Thou grant to us, Thy lowly servants, ** the pardon of our failings and 
our sins. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I heard the rumor of the power of the cross * that paradise is 
opened thereby * and I cried out aloud saying: * Glory to Thy power, * O 
Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou wast taken up in glory, O King of the angels, that Thou mightest send 
us the Comforter from the Father. Wherefore we cry: Glory to Thine 
Ascension, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the Savior ascended in the flesh unto the Father, the arrays of the angels 
were astonished at Him and cried aloud: Glory to Thine Ascension, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The hosts of the angels cried unto those above: Lift up the gates for Christ 
our King; Him do we praise together with the Father and the Spirit. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: The Virgin gave birth without the experience of those things 
that pertain to motherhood. But though she was a mother, she remained a 
virgin; wherefore praising her, we cry: Rejoice, O Theotokos. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: I heard the rumor of the power of the cross * that paradise is 
opened thereby * and I cried out aloud saying: * Glory to Thy power, * O 
Lord. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou 
art our God; * we know none other besides Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having filled all things with joy, O Merciful One, Thou didst come in Thy 
flesh unto the hosts on high. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the hosts of angels saw Thee being lifted up, they cried aloud: Lift ye the 
gates for our King. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the apostles beheld the Savior being lifted up on high, they cried with 
trembling: Glory be to Thee, O our King. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: We praise thee as a Virgin after childbirth, O Theotokos; for 
thou didst conceive God the Word in the flesh for the sake of the world. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for 
Thou art our God; * we know none other besides Thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become 
my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and Thy 
right hand saved me, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
In their hope for the coming of the Spirit, the apostles leapt for joy as they 
beheld on high the Creator being lifted up, and they cried out with fear: Glory 
be to Thine ascent. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The angels came and cried unto Thy disciples, O Christ: In like manner as 
ye see Christ going up, so shall He, the righteous Judge of all, come in the flesh. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the hosts of heaven saw Thee, our Savior, being taken up into the heights 
together with Thy body, they cried out, saying: Great is Thy love for mankind, 
O Master. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Thou bush un-burnt, and mountain and living ladder, and 
gate of heaven, we glorify thee as is meet, O glorious Mary, thou boast of the 
Orthodox. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath 
become my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and 
Thy right hand saved me, O Lord. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VI:  
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
Ikos: Leaving the things of earth upon the earth, and surrendering to the 
earth things of ashes, come, let us come to our senses and raise our eyes and 
thoughts on high; let us, O mortals, turn our gaze together with our senses up 
unto the heavenly gates. Let us consider ourselves present at the Mount of 
Olives, and gaze intently at the Redeemer who is riding upon a cloud; for the 
Lord hath hastened up from there into the heavens. And there the bountiful 
Giver of gifts distributed gifts unto His apostles, calling to them as a Father, 
and strengthening them; He guided them like Sons and said unto them: I am 
not separated from you; I am with you, and no one can be against you. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Thou Who wast taken up on a cloud of light didst save the world, O God 
of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
O Christ, having taken upon Thy shoulders our nature, which had gone 
astray, Thou didst ascend and bring it unto God the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Thou Who didst ascend in the flesh unto the bodiless Father, O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having raised our nature, which was deadened by sin, Thou didst bring it 
unto Thine own Father, O Savior. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: O Thou Who wast born of the Virgin, thereby making her the 
Theotokos, O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father * 
hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O ye 
priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Christ, the Giver of life, Who in two essences hath risen into the 
heavens with glory and sitteth together with the Father, O ye priests hymn, and 
ye peoples supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Thee, O Savior, Who didst deliver creation from slavery to the idols, 
and didst present it free unto Thine own Father, do we give praise, and 
supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto Him Who by His descent destroyed the adversary, and Who by His 
ascent raised up mankind give praise; O ye priests, hymn, and ye peoples, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Thou hast proved to be more excellent than the cherubim, O 
pure Theotokos, since thou hast carried in thy womb Him that rideth upon 
them. Together with the bodiless ones, we mortals glorify Him throughout all 
ages. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father 
* hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O 
ye priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages.  
We then chant the Hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the apostles beheld Thee, Christ God, the Redeemer of the world, being 
exalted in a manner befitting God, they magnified Thee with awe as they leapt 
for joy. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Beholding Thy deified flesh on high, O Christ, the angels beckoned to one 
another: Truly this is our God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As the orders of the Bodiless saw Thee being lifted up in the clouds, O 
Christ God, they cried: Lift up the gates for the King of Glory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thee, Who didst descend unto the utmost depths of the earth, and Who 
didst save man and exalt him by Thine Ascension, do we magnify. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Theotokos, save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, O Theotokos, Mother of Christ God. As thou didst 
behold ascending from the earth Him Whom thou didst conceive, thou didst 
magnify Him together with the angels. 
 And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion 
Katavasia: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Exapostilarion: 
While Thy disciples looked on Thee, Thou didst ascend, * O Christ, unto 
the Father to sit beside Him. * angels hastened, running on before, and cried: * 
Lift ye the gates up, lift them up; * for the King hath ascended ** unto His 
bright primal glory. 
Glory ..., (From the Menaion if there is one) Both now ..., While Thy ..., 
On the Praises, The usual Psalm, if there are Stichera for the Praises 
from the Menaion they are included. After the chanting of the Praises: 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
Having fulfilled His will, * thus pleasing well the Father, * Thou didst 
ascend * in glory. The things of heaven ** didst Thou unite thus with the things 
of earth. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; * shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
A brilliant cloud of light * conveyed Thee to the heavens, * whilst with great 
fear and trembling * the angels came and ministered unto ** Thy divine 
command. 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, * the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Let us, together with the apostles * and the Theotokos, * chant a divinely-
beauteous hymn * of praise, upon seeing the Lord ** taken up in the clouds. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
Unto the Mount of Olives didst Thou come, * Thou Who hast mercy on 
the race of mankind. * And a cloud took Thee up out of the sight of Thy 
disciples, * who, on one hand, trembled because of that which they beheld, * 
and, on the other hand, rejoiced * at their expectation of the Holy Spirit, * 
wherein do Thou make us steadfast, O Savior, ** and have mercy on us. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; * and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., Thou hast ascended ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: The Dismissal ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
THURSDAY OF THE SEVENTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE VIII of the Canon, 
including the Irmos. 
The Son of God who before all ages wast born of the Father hath in these 
last times become incarnate of the Virgin-Mother, O ye priests hymn, and ye 
peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Unto Christ, the Giver of life, Who in two essences hath risen into the 
heavens with glory and sitteth together with the Father, O ye priests hymn, and 
ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Unto Thee, O Savior, Who didst deliver creation from slavery to the idols, 
and didst present it free unto Thine own Father, do we give praise, and we 
supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Unto Him Who by His descent destroyed the adversary, and Who by His 
ascent raised up mankind give praise; O ye priests, hymn, and ye peoples, 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The intelligences appeared unto the apostles at the Ascension and said: Why 
stand ye gazing in astonishment? He that goeth up into the heavens shall come 
again to judge men upon earth, since He is the only Judge. 
Theotokion: Thou hast proved to be more excellent than the cherubim, O 
pure Theotokos, since thou hast carried in thy womb Him that rideth upon 
them. Together with the bodiless ones, we mortals glorify Him throughout all 
ages. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion for the Feast Tone IV: 
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; *and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory for the Saint, 
if there be any. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
The Prokeimenon in Tone VII: Be Thou exalted above the heavens, * O 
God, and Thy glory above all the earth. 
Verse: Ready is my heart, O God, ready is my heart; I will sing and chant 
in my glory. 
 
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (25:13-19) 
In those days: King Agrippa and Bernice came unto Caesarea to salute 
Festus. And when they had been there many days, Festus declared Paul’s cause 
unto the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix: About 
whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews 
informed me, desiring to have judgment against him. To whom I answered, It is 
not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which 
is accused have the accusers face to face, and have licence to answer for himself 
concerning the crime laid against him. Therefore, when they were come hither, 
without any delay on the morrow I sat on the judgment seat, and commanded 
the man to be brought forth. Against whom when the accusers stood up, they 
brought none accusation of such things as I supposed: But had certain 
questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus, which was 
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. 
Alleluia in Tone II: 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (16:23 - 33) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: Amen, amen, I say unto you, in that day 
ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask 
the Father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in 
my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. These things have 
I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shall no more 
speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father. At that 
day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father 
for you: For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have 
believed that I came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come 

--- PAGE 14 ---
into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. His disciples said 
unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb. Now are we 
sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: 
by this we believe that thou camest forth from God. Jesus answered them, Do 
ye now believe? Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be 
scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not 
alone, because the Father is with me. These things I have spoken unto you, that 
in me ye might have peace. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of the 
First Canon of the feast, in Tone V: 
 Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
 
Communion Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice 
of the trumpet. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
  
 
