--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING IN THE SEVENTH WEEK 
FRIDAY IN THE SEVENTH WEEK 
For the apodosis of the Feast of the Ascension, except for the Readings, and 
the Antiphons, we chant everything as set forth on the Feast of the Ascension 
in Vespers, Matins, and at the Liturgy.  
 
AT LITURGY 
In place of the Antiphons we chant the Beatitudes with 8 Troparia from 
ODE IX of both Festal Canons. 
As the apostles beheld Thee, Christ God, the Redeemer of the world, being 
exalted in a manner befitting God, they magnified Thee with awe as they leapt 
for joy. 
Beholding Thy deified flesh on high, O Christ, the angels beckoned to one 
another: Truly this is our God. 
As the orders of the Bodiless saw Thee being lifted up in the clouds, O 
Christ God, they cried: Lift up the gates for the King of Glory. 
Thee, Who didst descend unto the utmost depths of the earth, and Who 
didst save man and exalt him by Thine Ascension, do we magnify. 
O what gifts that surpass understanding! O dread mystery! For He Who 
reigneth over all hath risen from earth to the heavens, and unto the disciples 
hath He sent the Holy Spirit, Who enlightened their minds and made them fiery 
with grace. 
To the ranks of the disciples did the Lord say: Tarry ye in Jerusalem, and I 
will send you another Comforter, Who is equal in rank to the Father, and in 
honor to Me, Whom ye behold being taken up and riding upon a radiant cloud. 
Glory ..., The majesty of Him Who became poor in the flesh hath been 
manifestly taken up above the heavens; and our fallen nature hath been 
honored by sitting with the Father. Let us all make feast, and with one accord 
let us cry out with jubilation and clap our hands rejoicing. 
Both now ..., The Light Who shone forth from the Light hath dawned forth 
from thee, O all-immaculate one, and He hath dispelled all the darkness of 
godlessness and enlightened those who sleep in the night. Wherefore, as is due, 
we all ever call thee blessed throughout the ages. 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
At the Entrance: 
Troparion of the Ascension, in Tone IV:  
Thou hast ascended in glory, O Christ our God, * having gladdened Thy 
disciples with the promise of the Holy Spirit; *and they were assured by the 
blessing * that Thou art the Son of God, ** the Redeemer of the world. 
 Glory..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the Ascension, in Tone VI:  
When Thou didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our sake, * uniting things on 
earth with the heavens, * Thou didst ascend in glory, O Christ our God, * 
departing not hence, but remaining inseparable from us, * and crying unto them 
that love Thee: ** I am with you, and no one shall be against you. 
 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VII: Be Thou exalted above the heavens, O 
God, * and Thy glory above all the earth. 
Verse: Ready is my heart, O God, ready is my heart; I will sing and chant 
in my glory. 
THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES (27:1 - 43) 
In those days: They determined that we should sail into Italy, and delivered 
Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named Julius, a centurion of 
Augustus’ band. And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, we launched, 
meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a Macedonian of 
Thessalonica, being with us. And the next day we touched at Sidon. And Julius 
courteously entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to 
refresh himself. And when we had launched from thence, we sailed under 
Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. And when we had sailed over the sea 
of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia. And there the 
centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us therein. 
And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against 
Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone; 
And, hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called The fair havens; nigh 
whereunto was the city of Lasea. Now when much time was spent, and when 
sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul 
admonished them, And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be 
with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our 
lives. Nevertheless the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship, 
more than those things which were spoken by Paul. And because the haven was 
not commodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by 

--- PAGE 3 ---
any means they might attain to Phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven 
of Crete, and lieth toward the south west and north west. And when the south 
wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, loosing 
thence, they sailed close by Crete. But not long after there arose against it a 
tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon. And when the ship was caught, and 
could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive. And running under a certain 
island which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat: Which 
when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest 
they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven. And we 
being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day they lightened the ship; 
And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship. And 
when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on 
us, all hope that we should be saved was then taken away. And as the shipmen 
were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, 
under colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship, Paul 
said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye 
cannot be saved. Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall 
off. And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them all to take meat, 
saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting, 
having taken nothing. Wherefore I pray you to take some meat: for this is for 
your health: for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you. And 
when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence 
of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to eat. Then were they all of 
good cheer, and they also took some meat. And we were in all in the ship two 
hundred threescore and sixteen souls. And when they had eaten enough, they 
lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea. And when it was day, 
they knew not the land: but they discovered a certain creek with a shore, into 
the which they were minded, if it were possible, to thrust in the ship. And when 
they had taken up the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and 
loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made 
toward shore. And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship 
aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder 
part was broken with the violence of the waves. And the soldiers’ counsel was 
to kill the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and escape. But the 
centurion, willing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose; and commanded 
that they which could swim should cast themselves first into the sea, and get to 
land: 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Alleluia in Tone II: 
Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice of the 
trumpet. 
Verse: Clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (17:18 - 26) 
At that time, the Lord lifted up His eyes to heaven and said: As thou hast 
sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world. And for 
their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the 
truth. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on 
me through their word; That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and 
I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou 
hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they 
may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be 
made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and 
hast loved them, as thou hast loved me. Father, I will that they also, whom thou 
hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which 
thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. O 
righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee, and 
these have known that thou hast sent me. And I have declared unto them thy 
name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in 
them, and I in them. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of the First 
Canon of the feast, in Tone V: 
 Refrain: Magnify, O my soul, * Christ the giver of life, ** Who ascended 
from earth to heaven. 
Irmos: O Thou who art God’s Mother transcending mind and word, * 
who ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee 
do we the faithful magnify with one accord. 
Communion Verse: God is gone up in jubilation, the Lord with the voice 
of the trumpet. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
 
