--- PAGE 1 ---
THE FEAST OF PENTECOST 
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
We celebrate Pentecost * and the coming of the Spirit, * and the time 
appointed for the promise, * and the fulfillment of hope. * How great is this 
mystery: * it is both exceeding great and most venerable. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto Thee: ** O Creator of all, Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Repeat: We celebrate Pentecost ..., 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Thou hast renewed Thy disciples with foreign tongues, O Christ, * that they 
might therewith proclaim Thee, * the immortal Word and God, ** Who 
granteth our souls great mercy. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
The Holy Spirit provideth all things; * He gusheth forth prophecy; * He 
perfecteth the priesthood; * He hath taught wisdom to the illiterate. * He hath 
shown forth the fishermen as theologians. * He holdeth together the whole 
institution of the Church. * Wherefore, O Comforter, * one in essence and 
throne with the Father and the Son, ** glory be to Thee. 
Tone II: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
We have seen the true Light; * we have received the heavenly Spirit; * we 
have found the true Faith, * we worship the indivisible Trinity; ** for He hath 
saved us.  
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Repeat: We have seen the true Light ...,  
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * 
let Israel hope in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
In the prophets Thou didst proclaim unto us * the way of salvation, * and 
the grace of Thy Spirit hath shone in the apostles, O our Savior; * Thou art 
God Who art from the beginning, * and for time to come, and unto the ages, ** 
Thou art our God. 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
In Thy courts shall I praise Thee, * the Savior of the world, * and bending 
my knee I shall worship Thine invincible might. * In the evening, in the morn, 
at midday, ** and at all times shall I bless Thee, O Lord. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
In Thy courts, O Lord, as we the faithful * bend the knee of the soul and 
the body, * we praise Thee, the beginningless Father, * the co-beginningless 
Son, * and the co-eternal and Most holy Spirit, ** Who dost enlighten and 
sanctify our souls. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Let us praise the consubstantial Trinity: * the Father and the Son, with the 
Holy Spirit; * for thus did all the prophets and apostles preach, ** with the 
martyrs. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII  
Come, O ye peoples, * let us worship the Godhead in three Hypostases: * 
the Son in the Father, with the Holy Spirit; * for the Father timelessly begat the 
Son, * Who is co-eternal and of one throne; * and the Holy Spirit was in the 
Father, glorified with the Son; * one Might, one essence, one Godhead, * which 
we all worship, saying: * Holy God, Who didst create all things through the Son, 
* with the co-operation of the Holy Spirit. * Holy Mighty, through Whom we 
have known the Father, * and through Whom the Holy Spirit came to the 
world. * Holy Immortal, the Comforting Spirit, * Who proceedest from the 
Father and restest in the Son. ** O Holy Trinity, glory be to Thee. 
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Three Scriptural Lessons. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF NUMBERS 
The Lord said to Moses: “Gather Me seventy men from the elders of Israel, 
whom thou thyself knowest that they are the elders of the people, and their 
scribes; and thou shalt bring them to the tabernacle of witness, and they shall 
stand there with thee. And I will go down, and speak there with thee; and I will 
take of the Spirit that is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall 
bear together with thee the assaults of the people, and thou shalt not bear them 
alone.” And Moses went out, and spake the words of the Lord to the people; 
and he gathered seventy of the elders of the people, and he set them round 
about the tabernacle. And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake to him, 
and took of the Spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the seventy men that 
were elders; and when the Spirit rested upon them, they prophesied and ceased. 
And there were two men left in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and 
the name of the other Medad; and the Spirit rested upon them, and these were 
of the number of those who were enrolled, but they did not come to the 
tabernacle; and they prophesied in the camp. And a young man ran and told 
Moses, and spake, saying: “Eldad and Medad prophesy in the camp.” And 
Joshua the son of Nun, who attended on Moses, the chosen one, said: “Lord 
Moses, forbid them.” And Moses said to him: “Art thou jealous on my account? 
Would that all the Lord’s people were prophets; whenever the Lord shall put 
His Spirit upon them.” 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF JOEL 
Thus saith the Lord: “Rejoice and be glad, ye children of Zion, in the Lord 
your God; for He hath given you food fully, and will rain upon you the early 
and the latter rain, as before. And the floors shall be filled with wheat, and the 
presses shall overflow with wine and oil. And I will recompense you for the 
years which the locust, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, and the 
cankerworm have eaten, even My great army, which I sent against you. And ye 
shall eat abundantly, and be satisfied, and shall praise the name of the Lord your 
God for the things which He hath wrought wonderfully with you: and My 
people shall not be shamed forever. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of 
Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and there is none else beside Me; and 
My people shall no more be ashamed forever. And it shall come to pass 
afterward, that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and 
your daughters shall prophesy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your 

--- PAGE 4 ---
young men shall see visions. And on My servants and handmaids in those days 
will I pour out of My Spirit. And I will show wonders in heaven, and upon the 
earth: blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke. The sun shall be turned into 
darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the 
Lord is come. And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name 
of the Lord shall be saved.”  
THE READING IS FROM EZEKIEL 
Thus said the Lord: “I will take you out from the nations, and will gather 
you out of all the lands, and will bring you into your own land: and I will 
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be purged from all your filthiness, 
and from all your idols, and I will cleanse you. And I will give you a new heart, 
and will put a new spirit in you: and I will take away the heart of stone out of 
your flesh, and will give you a heart of flesh. And I will put My Spirit in you, 
and will cause you to walk in Mine ordinances, and to keep My judgments, and 
do them. And ye shall dwell upon the land which I gave to your fathers; and ye 
shall be to Me a people, and I will be to you a God.” 
At the Litiya, in Tone II: 
In the prophets Thou didst proclaim unto us * the way of salvation, * and 
the grace of Thy Spirit hath shone in the apostles, O our Savior; * Thou art 
God Who art from the beginning, * and for time to come, and unto the ages, ** 
Thou art our God. 
In Thy courts shall I praise Thee, * the Savior of the world, * and bending 
my knee I shall worship Thine invincible might. * In the evening, in the morn, 
at midday, ** and at all times shall I bless Thee, O Lord. 
In Thy courts, O Lord, as we the faithful * bend the knee of the soul and 
the body, * we praise Thee, the beginningless Father, * the co-beginningless 
Son, * and the co-eternal and Most holy Spirit, ** Who dost enlighten and 
sanctify our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
When Thou didst send down Thy Spirit, O Lord, * while the apostles were 
seated, * the children of the Jews beheld and were astonished with amazement; 
* for they heard them speaking in other, foreign tongues, * according as the 
Spirit bestowed on them; * for though they were unlearned, they were made 
wise; * and in catching and bringing the nations to the Faith, * they preached of 
things divine. * Wherefore, we also cry to Thee: * O Thou Who wast seen on 
earth and didst save us from error, ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Aposticha of the Feast, in Tone VI: 
Being ignorant of the power of Thy most holy Spirit, * which was come 
unto Thine apostles, O Lord, * the heathen imagined the diversity of tongues to 
be drunkenness. * But we who are established by them speak thus unceasingly: 
* Take not Thy Holy Spirit from us, we pray, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
O Lord, the descent of the Holy Spirit, * which enveloped Thine apostles, * 
made them to speak with other tongues. * Hence, the strange wonder was 
thought to be drunkenness by the unbelievers, * but to the believers it was a 
cause of salvation. * Wherefore, we beseech Thee to grant us also His 
illumination, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 
Heavenly King, * Comforter, Spirit of Truth, * Who art everywhere present 
* and fillest all things, * Treasury of good gifts * and Giver of life: * come and 
abide in us, * and cleanse us of all impurity, ** and save our souls, O good One. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Of old the tongues were confounded * because of the audacity in the 
building of the tower, * but now the tongues are made wise * because of the 
glory of divine knowledge. * There God condemned the impious because of 
their offense, * and here Christ hath enlightened the fishermen by the Spirit. * 
At that time the confusion of tongues was wrought for punishment, * but now 
the concord of tongues hath been inaugurated ** for the salvation of our souls. 
 “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
The Troparion of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. (Thrice) 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Troparion of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. II) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Let us, O ye faithful, * radiantly celebrate that which followeth the former 
feast, * and is the concluding feast; * that is, the day of Pentecost, * the 
fulfillment of the promise and of the appointed time, * for thereon the fire from 
the Comforter came down upon earth, * as it were in the form of tongues, * 
and enlightened the disciples, * making them participants in heavenly things. * 
The light of the Comforter ** hath come and enlightened the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. III) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
The well-spring of the Spirit, coming to earth, * noetically divided into rivers 
of fire, * and bedewed the apostles, enlightening them; * and He was to them a 
bedewing cloud, * a fire enlightening them, a flame raining down. * Through 
them we have received grace, through fire and water. ** The light of the 
Comforter hath come and illumined the world.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
The Polyeleos 
Megalynarion: We magnify Thee, * O Christ the Giver of life, * and we 
honor Thine All-Holy Spirit, * Whom Thou didst send from the Father * 
to Thy divine disciples. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
Then the Sessional Hymn of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
After Thine arising from the tomb, O Christ, * and Thy divine Ascension to 
the height of heaven, * Thou didst send down Thy glory upon the God-seers, O 
compassionate One, * having renewed a right spirit in Thy disciples. * 
Wherefore, like a musical harp plucked with a divine plectrum, ** they have 
mysteriously made clear Thy command, O Savior, and Thy dispensation. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 

--- PAGE 7 ---
The Songs of Ascent, 1st Antiphon, in Tone IV: 
From my youth * do many passions war against me; * but do Thou Thyself 
defend ** and save me, O my Savior. 
Ye haters of Zion * shall be shamed by the Lord; * for like grass, by the fire 
** shall ye be withered. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit, * every soul is quickened, * and, through cleansing, is 
exalted ** and made radiant by the Triple Unity in a hidden sacred manner.  
Prokeimenon Tone IV: Thy good Spirit shall lead me * in the land of 
uprightness. 
Verse: O Lord, hear my prayer, give ear unto my supplication. 
Let every breath ..., 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (20:19-23) 
Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the 
doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came 
Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. And 
when he had so said, he shewed unto them his hands and his side. Then were 
the disciples glad, when they saw the LORD. Then said Jesus to them again, 
Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. And when 
he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy 
Ghost: Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose 
soever sins ye retain, they are retained. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
 Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and 
according to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Festal Sticheron, in Tone VI: 
Heavenly King, * Comforter, Spirit of Truth, * Who art everywhere present 
* and fillest all things, * Treasury of good gifts * and Giver of life: * come and 
abide in us, * and cleanse us of all impurity, ** and save our souls, O good One. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” The Canons: 
The first Canon, by Cosmos the Monk, in Tone VII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: He Who quencheth wars with a lofty arm * hath covered over 
Pharaoh and his chariots in the sea. * Let us sing unto Him, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As of old Thou didst promise the disciples, O Christ Who didst send the 
Spirit Comforter, Thou didst indeed shine forth light upon the world, O Thou 
Who lovest mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
That which of old was preached by the Law and the prophets hath been 
fulfilled; for today the grace of the divine Spirit hath been poured out upon all 
the faithful. 
The second Canon, by Kyr John Arclas, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Covered by the divine cloud ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The pure and revered mouth spake: From you there shall be no separation, 
O My friends! For, seated together upon the Father’s most high throne, I will 
pour out the Spirit, to enlighten them that desire abundant grace. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Having reached the end, the Word most true calmly 
perfecteth the heart; for having finished His work, Christ gladdened His friends, 
giving them the Spirit in a mighty wind with tongues of fire. 
Katavasia: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of tongue 
proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the impurity 
from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is initiated 
into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-inspired 
songs. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou didst say unto Thy disciples, O Christ: * Tarry ye in 
Jerusalem * till ye be clothed with power from on high, * and I will send 
you another Comforter like unto Me, * Who is My Spirit and the Spirit of 
the Father, * in Whom ye shall be established. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The power of the divine Spirit coming down divinely joined together into 
one, the divided tongues of those who of old had come to a wicked agreement, 
thereby imparting unto the faithful the knowledge of the Trinity, in which we 
are established. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: Only the prayer of the prophetess ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Incomprehensible is the supreme Godhead, for it hath shown the illiterate 
fishermen to be wise men who with their speech stopped the mouths of the 
sophists, and brought out of the deepest night countless peoples, through the 
brilliance of the Spirit. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., From unbegotten Light the all-effecting never-failing 
Brightness doth proceed, Who now shineth forth the radiance one in nature, of 
the Father’s power, through the Son, unto the nations in the fiery voice on 
Zion. 
Katavasia: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought 
a broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed 
the fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with 
children. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The ardent followers of the Savior were filled with joy, * and they who were 
fearful before obtained boldness, * for today the Holy Spirit descended from on 
high upon the house of the disciples, * and each one spake differently to the 
people; * for the tongues, in likeness as of fire, were dispersed, yet burned them 
not, ** but rather bedewed them. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
ODE IV 
Irmos: When the prophet perceived Thy coming in the last days, O 
Christ, * he cried out: I have heard of Thy might, O Lord, * that Thou 
hast come to save all Thine anointed ones. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
He that formerly spake through the prophets, and was foretold in the law 
unto the imperfect, the Comforter, the true God, doth become known today 
unto the ministers and witnesses of the Word. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Bearing the sign of Divinity, the Spirit was distributed in fire upon the 
apostles, and was manifested in strange tongues, for the divine Power coming 
from the Father is absolute. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: O King of kings, even Thou Who art ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having by word thrown open the divine laver of regeneration, Thou, O 
Word of God, Compound Nature, dost bathe me with streams from Thine 
incorrupt, pierced side, sealing with the fervor of the Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
All things bow their knees unto the Comforter, and unto the Son of the 
Father, and unto the consubstantial Father, for in Three Hypostases they saw 
the true Being, inaccessible, timeless, and one; for the grace of the Spirit hath 
shone forth light. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Be ye perfected by the supreme Godhead, all ye 
ministers of the Thrice-radiant Essence; for, beyond nature, Christ as 
Benefactor doth work perfection, making light shine unto salvation, providing 
all the grace of the Spirit. 
Katavasia: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.  
ODE V 
Irmos: The Spirit of salvation, O Lord, * Who was conceived in the loins 
of the prophets because of their fear of Thee * and was brought forth 
upon the earth, * doth purify the hearts of the apostles, * and is renewed 
in an upright manner in the faithful; * for Thy commandments are light 
and peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
This power that came down today is the Good Spirit, the Spirit of the 
wisdom of God, the Spirit that proceedeth from the Father, and through the 
Son hath appeared unto us the faithful, presented in the holiness of His nature, 
unto those in whom He dwelleth, and in whom He is seen. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: O ye children of the Church ..., 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As He Himself was well-pleased, of His own accord the unsubordinated 
Spirit cometh forth from the Father, making wise with tongues the apostles, 
sealing with the impress of the life-bearing Word, being of One Might with the 
Father, and One Form, of Whom the Savior spake also. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., That He might heal the minds of sin, the All-ruling 
God and Word doth prepare for Himself as a spotless dwelling the apostles, in 
whom the light of the Spirit, One in might and essence with Him, doth now 
make Its abode. 
Katavasia: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto 
light, * receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a 
redeeming purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth 
from Zion, * even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship 
I have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the 
deadly abyss.. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Of Thy Spirit hast Thou abundantly poured out upon all flesh, according as 
Thou hast said, O Lord, and all things are filled with Thy knowledge, for Thou, 
the Son didst come forth from the Father immutably, and the Spirit indivisibly 
proceedeth. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: Thou hast shown forth from the Virgin ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Do Thou renew within us, that we may for ever possess the right Spirit that 
we long for, Who proceedeth from the Father always invisibly, consuming the 
stains of hated matter and cleansing the filth of our minds, O Ruler of all. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., A long-desired dignity dost Thou establish for the 
apostles in Zion mindful of Thy coming, O Spirit: the profession of the Word 
Begotten of the Father, which swiftly exposed the cruel prattle of the heathens’ 
babbling. 
Katavasia: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
Ikos: Grant speedy and steadfast consolation unto Thy servants, O Jesus, 
when our spirits are become despondent. Depart not from our souls when they 
be in afflictions, nor be Thou afar from our minds when they be in tribulations, 
but do Thou ever go before us. Draw nigh unto us, draw nigh, O Thou Who art 
everywhere present; and even as Thou wast ever with Thine apostles, so also do 
Thou unite Thyself to them that long for Thee, O compassionate One, that, 
being one with Thee, we may praise and glorify Thine all-holy Spirit. 
 SYNAXARION 
On this day the eight Sunday of Pascha, we celebrate Holy Pentecost. 
Verse: In a mighty wind doth Christ distribute the divine Spirit. 
Verse: In the form of fiery tongues unto the apostles. 
Verse: In one great day, the Spirit was poured forth upon the Fishermen. 
We celebrate this Feast of Holy Pentecost today in commemoration of the 
coming of the all-holy Spirit into the world, which took place fifty days after the 
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. We have received this 
Feast from the Hebrew Bible; for, just as the Hebrews celebrate their own 
Pentecost, honoring the number seven, and because they received the Law fifty 
days after the Passover, so also do we, celebrating fifty days after Pascha, 
receive, instead of the Law, the all-holy Spirit, Who gives us laws, guides us into 
all truth, and decrees what is pleasing to God. It should be known that among 
the Hebrews there were three great Feasts: Passover, Pentecost, and 
Tabernacles. They observed Passover in commemoration of their deliverance 
from Egypt and their passage across the Red Sea; for “Pascha,” in the Hebrew 
language, means “passage.” This Feast signifies our own passage and return 
from the darkness of sin to Paradise. They celebrated Pentecost in 
commemoration of the hardships they endured in the desert, where they 
received the Law, and of the way in which they were brought through many 
afflictions into the Promised Land, for then it was that they enjoyed fruit, 
wheat, and wine. It also signifies the hardship that we suffer from unbelief and 
our entry into the Church; for then it is that we partake of the Body and Blood 
of the Master. The third Feast is that of Tabernacles, celebrated after the 
harvesting of fruits, that is, five months after the Feast of Passover. This Feast 
was celebrated in memory of the day on which Moses first pitched the 
Tabernacle that he saw on Mount Sinai in the cloud and which was constructed 

--- PAGE 13 ---
by the architect Beseleel. Fashioning tabernacles themselves, the Hebrews 
would celebrate the same Feast: living in the fields and giving thanks to God, 
they would reap the fruits of their labors. This Feast is a type of our 
resurrection from the dead, when, after our bodily tabernacles have been 
dissolved and reconstituted, we will enjoy the fruits of our labors, keeping 
festival in the eternal tabernacles. It should be known that on this same day of 
Pentecost that we are celebrating, the Holy Spirit descended upon the Disciples. 
Since the Holy Fathers decided to divide up the Feast on account of the majesty 
of the all-holy and Life-Creating Spirit, because He is One of the Holy and Life-
Originating Trinity, we will speak tomorrow about the Descent of the Holy 
Spirit. 
By the intercessions of Thy Holy apostles, O Christ our God,  
have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed 
the fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O 
Lord, the God of our fathers!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
While the apostles proclaimed the great divine things, the unbelievers 
considered as drunkenness the working of the Spirit, through Whom the Trinity 
becometh known, the one God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The indivisible Nature do we theologize in Orthodox manner: God the 
beginningless Father, the Word and Spirit of the same authority, and we cry: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: The harmonious music of the flutes ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Not understanding the prophetic voice, but hearing the apostles speak in 
strange tongues, the foolish called it drunkenness caused by wine; whereas we 
the pious fittingly call out to Thee: O Renewer of all things, blessed art Thou! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The divinely-inspired seer of visions, Joel, thundered forth a divine saying, 
as if spoken by the Word of the supreme Godhead: They on whom I will pour 
out my Spirit, shall exclaim together: O Nature, splendid with the Triple 
Radiance, blessed art Thou! 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., At the third hour grace was seen to be well 
distributed, that it might indicate the worship of Three Hypostases in a 
simplicity of authority, but now we see in that unity on this, the Lord’s day, the 
Son, the Father and the blessed Spirit! 
Katavasia: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor 
the lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the 
Comforter * doth inspire us to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * 
equal in might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow 
of speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for 
God showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be 
unvanquished by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
When the quickening mighty breath of the all-holy Spirit came down from 
on high upon the fishermen in the form of tongues of fire, they proclaimed the 
greatness of God: All ye works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Without dreading the fearful fire and like those treading up the untouchable 
mountain, come, let us stand upon Mount Zion, in the city of the living God, 
singing in choir together with the Spirit-bearing apostles: All ye works, praise ye 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: The type of the Godhead ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The Spirit coming down in likeness of the tongues of fire, doth impress 
upon the memory of the apostles the man-saving doctrine which Christ Who 
heard it from the Father, declared unto them. Creation, formerly alienated and 
now reconciled, doth praise Thee. 
Refrain: We bless Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
O Light self-radiant and the cause of light, being alone self-mastering, unto 
salvation hast Thou come filling the apostles, esteemed as the summit by Thy 
servants. O that Thou shouldest grant the Spirit in great abundance! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
 Both now ..., The Spirit-sated mouth of the prophets sang of Thy 
sojourning in the flesh, O Sovereign; and the Spirit, brought forth from the 
Father’s bosom, Uncreated, Co-Creator and Co-enthroned with Thee, is 
revered by those who believe in a singular incarnation. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
(The Magnificat is not sung)  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh 
to the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, 
* thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Borne in gladness upon a chariot of flaming fire, the fire-breathing zealot of 
old typified that radiant breath which now shone forth from above upon the 
apostles, and these, illumined, made known the Trinity to all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Strange things were heard from the disciples, not in accordance with the law 
of their nature, for while only one voice spake, by the grace of the Spirit various 
peoples, tribes, and nations heard the great things of God, learning the 
knowledge of the Trinity. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
It is proper to hymn the maiden who giveth life; for she alone carried in her 
womb the Word that came to heal the diseased nature of man; and Who seated 
now on the right hand of the father, hath sent down the grace of the Spirit. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Let all of us, on whom the divinely-poured grace 
hath breathed, shining, flashing, changed with a strange and most magnificent 
transformation, having come to know the Essence equal in might, indivisible, 
and wise, and thrice radiant, render glory. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Katavasia: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and of mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
O Thou all-holy Spirit, * Who from the Father dost proceed, * and through 
the Son hast descended * on the unlettered disciples: * Do Thou now sanctify 
and save ** all that acknowledge Thee as God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
The Father is Light; the Word is Light; * and the Holy Spirit is Light, * Who 
was sent to the apostles * in the form of fiery tongues; * and thus through Him 
all creation ** is illumined and guided to worship the Holy Trinity 
On the Praises, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written. * This glory shall 
be to all His saints.  
Today all the nations beheld strange things in the city of David, * when the 
Holy Spirit descended in fiery tongues, * as Luke, the herald of divine things, 
declared; * for he said: As the disciples of Christ were gathered together, * there 
came a sound as of a mighty wind, * and it filled the house where they were 
sitting; * and all began to articulate strange and foreign words, * doctrines 
strange and new, ** strange and new teachings of the Holy Trinity. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Repeat: Today all the nations beheld strange things ..., 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
The Holy Spirit hath ever been, * and is, and shall be, * neither beginning 
nor ending; * but He is ever ranked and numbered together with the Father and 
the Son. * He is Life, and life-creating; * Light, and light-bestowing; * by nature 
good, and the source of goodness; * through Him the Father is known, and the 
Son is glorified; * and thereby all acknowledge a single sovereignty, * single 
covenant, ** one adoration of the Holy Trinity. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp.  
Repeat: The Holy Spirit hath ever been ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
The Holy Spirit is Light and Life, * and a living, noetic Fountain, * a Spirit 
of wisdom, a Spirit of understanding; * a good, an upright, a noetic Spirit, * 
presiding in power and purging offenses. * Deity and deifier; * He is Fire, 
issuing from Fire, * speaking, working, distributing the gifts; * through Whom 
all the prophets, and the apostles of God, * and all the martyrs received their 
crowns. * Strange is this report, strange and new this sight, ** a Fire divided 
that these gifts may be apportioned.  
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Repeat: The Holy Spirit is Light and Life ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Heavenly King, * Comforter, Spirit of Truth, * Who art everywhere present 
* and fillest all things, * Treasury of good gifts * and Giver of life: * come and 
abide in us, * and cleanse us of all impurity, ** and save our souls, O good One. 
The Great Doxology  
 Dismissal Troparion of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY 
In place of the usual antiphons, we use the festal antiphons: 
The First Antiphon (Second Tone) 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament declareth 
the work of His hands. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: Day unto day poureth forth speech * and night unto night 
proclaimeth knowledge. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words unto 
the ends of the world. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, * both now and 
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
Refrain: Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Savior, save us. 
  
The Second Antiphon (Second Tone) 
Verse: The Lord hear thee in the day of affliction; * the name of the God of 
Jacob defend thee. 
Refrain: O Good Comforter, save us who sing to Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: Let Him send forth unto thee help from His sanctuary, * and out of 
Zion let Him help thee. 
Refrain: O Good Comforter, save us who sing to Thee: Alleluia. 
Verse: The Lord grant thee according to thy heart, * and fulfill all thy 
purposes. 
Refrain: O Good Comforter, save us who sing to Thee: Alleluia. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
O only-begotten Son and Word of God, * Who art immortal, yet didst deign 
for our salvation * to be incarnate of the Holy Theotokos and Ever-Virgin 
Mary, * and without change didst become man, * and was crucified, O Christ 
God, * trampling down death by death. * Thou Who art one of the Holy 
Trinity, ** glorified with the Father and the Holy Spirit, save us. 
  

--- PAGE 19 ---
The Third Antiphon 
 Verse: O Lord, in Thy strength the king shall be glad, and in Thy 
salvation shall he rejoice exceedingly. 
 Troparion, in Tone VIII: Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast 
shown forth the fishermen as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them 
the Holy Spirit, * and through them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O 
Lover of mankind, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: The desire of his heart hast Thou granted unto him, and hast not 
denied him the requests of his lips. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
Verse: Thou wentest before him with the blessings of goodness, Thou 
hast set upon his head a crown of precious stone. 
Choir: Repeat Troparion 
The entry verse: (Introit) 
Be Thou exalted, O Lord, in Thy strength; we will sing and chant of Thy 
mighty acts. 
 And immediately after that, the Troparion and Kontakion of the feast: 
Tone VIII: Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth 
the fishermen as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, 
* and through them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, 
glory be to Thee. 
 Glory ..., Both now..., in Tone VIII:  
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
 Instead of the Trisagion:  
As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia.  
 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all 
the earth, * and their words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES: (2:1-11) 
At that time: when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with 
one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a 
rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And 
there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of 
them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with 
other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. And there were dwelling at 
Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. Now when this 
was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because 
that every man heard them speak in his own language. And they were all 
amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which 
speak Galilaeans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we 
were born? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in 
Mesopotamia, and in Judaea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and 
Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of 
Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our 
tongues the wonderful works of God. 
Alleluia, in Tone I. 
Verse: By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established, and all the 
might of them by the Spirit of His mouth. 
Verse: The Lord looked down from heaven, He beheld all the sons of 
men. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (7:37-52; 8:12) 
In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If 
any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as 
the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. (But this 
spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the 
Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.) Many 
of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the 
prophet. Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of 
Galilee? Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, 
and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? So there was a division 
among the people because of him. And some of them would have taken him; 
but no man laid hands on him. Then came the officers to the chief priests and 
Pharisees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The officers 
answered, Never man spake like this man. Then answered them the Pharisees, 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Are ye also deceived? Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on 
him? But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed. Nicodemus saith 
unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of them,) Doth our law 
judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth? They answered 
and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and look: for out of Galilee 
ariseth no prophet. Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of 
the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the 
light of life. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of 
the Second Canon of the feast: 
 
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. ** 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
  
Communion Verse: Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of 
uprightness. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
  
 
 
