--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
After the Psalm of Introduction (Psalm 103), the Great Litany, chanted 
as follows: 
Priest/Deacon: In peace let us pray to the Lord. 
And the rest, as usual until: 
Priest/Deacon: For travelers by land, sea, and air ..., 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For the people here present, who await the grace of the 
Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For them that bow their hearts and knees before the 
Lord, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For our strengthening, that we may fulfill what is well-
pleasing, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For the sending down upon us of His rich mercies, let us 
pray to the Lord.. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For our bending of knees, that it may be received as 
incense before Him, let us pray to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: For them that are in need of help from Him, let us pray 
to the Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: That we may be delivered from ..., 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us ..., 
Choir: Lord have mercy. 
Priest/Deacon: Calling to remembrance our most holy ..., 
Choir: To Thee O Lord. 
The priest: For unto Thee is due all glory, honor, and worship, to the 
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto 
the ages of ages. 
The choir: Amen. 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
There is no Kathisma. 
 On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera are sung: 
Of the Feast, in Tone IV: 
Verse: If Thou, shouldest mark iniquities O Lord: O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Today all the nations beheld strange things in the city of David, * when the 
Holy Spirit descended in fiery tongues, * as Luke, the herald of divine things, 
declared; * for he said: As the disciples of Christ were gathered together, * there 
came a sound as of a mighty wind, * and it filled the house where they were 
sitting; * and all began to articulate strange and foreign words, * doctrines 
strange and new, ** strange and new teachings of the Holy Trinity. 
Verse: For Thy Name’s sake have I waited patiently for Thee, O Lord: 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Repeat: Today all the nations beheld ..., 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch: * 
let Israel hope in the Lord. 
The Holy Spirit hath ever been, * and is, and shall be, * neither beginning 
nor ending; * but He is ever ranked and numbered together with the Father and 
the Son. * He is Life, and life-creating; * Light, and light-bestowing; * by nature 
good, and the source of goodness; * through Him the Father is known, and the 
Son is glorified; * and thereby all acknowledge a single sovereignty, * single 
covenant, ** one adoration of the Holy Trinity. 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Repeat: The Holy Spirit hath ever been ..., 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
The Holy Spirit is Light and Life, * and a living, noetic Fountain, * a Spirit 
of wisdom, a Spirit of understanding; * a good, an upright, a noetic Spirit, * 
presiding in power and purging offenses. * Deity and deifier; * He is Fire, 
issuing from Fire, * speaking, working, distributing the gifts; * through Whom 
all the prophets, and the apostles of God, * and all the martyrs received their 
crowns. * Strange is this report, strange and new this sight, ** a Fire divided 
that these gifts may be apportioned.  
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Repeat: The Holy Spirit is Light and Life 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Heavenly King, * Comforter, Spirit of Truth, * Who art everywhere present 
* and fillest all things, * Treasury of good gifts * and Giver of life: * come and 
abide in us, * and cleanse us of all impurity, ** and save our souls, O good One. 
After the Entrance, and “O joyous light ...,” 
The Great Prokeimenon, in Tone VII:  
Prokeimenon: What God is as great as our God? * Thou art God, Who 
alone workest wonders. 
Verse: Thou hast made Thy power known among the peoples. 
Verse: And I said: Now have I made a beginning; this change hath been 
wrought by the right hand of the Most High. 
Verse: I remembered the works of the Lord; for I will remember Thy 
wonders from the beginning. 
Then immediately: 
Priest/Deacon: Again and again, on bended knees, let us pray to the 
Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. (Thrice) 
And as we bend our knees upon the earth with our heads uncovered, the 
priest readeth the prayers from the Ambon in a great voice, in the hearing of all: 
O Immaculate, undefiled, beginningless, invisible, incomprehensible, 
unsearchable, unchangeable, unsurpassable, immeasurable, long-suffering Lord, 
Who alone hast immortality, Who dwellest in light unapproachable, Who didst 
create heaven and the earth and the sea and all that was fashioned therein, Who, 
before being asked, grantest to all their petitions: Thee do we pray and Thee do 
we supplicate, O Master and Friend of man, the Father of our Lord and God 
and Savior Jesus Christ, Who for us men and for our salvation came down from 
the heavens and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and Mary, the Ever-virgin and 
glorious Theotokos; Who, first having taught by words, and then having 
demonstrated by deeds, endured the saving Passion at that time and granted 
unto us, Thy humble, sinful, and unworthy servants, an example, that we should 
offer prayers with the bending of the neck and the knees for our own sins and 
the ignorances of the people. Do Thou Thyself, O most merciful One and 
Friend of man, therefore hearken unto us on whatever day We call upon Thee, 
and especially on this day of Pentecost, whereon, after our Lord Jesus Christ 
had ascended into the heavens and had sat at the right hand of Thee, the God 
and Father, He sent down upon His Disciples and apostles the Holy Spirit, 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Who alighted on each of them, and they were all filled with His inexhaustible 
grace, and they spake in other tongues of Thy mighty acts, and prophesied. 
Therefore, do Thou now hearken unto us who beseech Thee, and remember us, 
the lowly and condemned, and restore us from the captivity of our souls, having 
Thine own compassion as an intercessor for us. Accept us who fall down 
before Thee and cry: We have sinned. Upon Thee were we cast from the womb; 
even from our mother’s womb, Thou art our God. But since our days have 
wasted away in vanity, we have been stripped of Thine aid, and have been 
deprived of all defense. Yet taking courage in Thy compassions, we cry: 
Remember not the sins and ignorances of our youth, and cleanse us of our 
secret sins. Cast us not away in the time of our old age; when our strength hath 
waned, forsake us not; before we return to the earth, grant that we return unto 
Thee, and attend Thou unto us in Thy kindness and grace. Measure our 
iniquities by Thy compassions. Set the abyss of Thy compassions against the 
multitude of our transgressions. Look down from Thy holy height, O Lord, 
upon Thy people who stand here present and await from Thee Thine abundant 
mercy. Visit us in Thy goodness. Deliver us from the oppression of the devil. 
Preserve our life with Thy holy and sacred laws. Entrust Thy people unto a 
faithful Guardian angel; gather us all into Thy Kingdom, grant forgiveness to 
them that hope in Thee; forgive them and us our sins. Purify us through the 
operation of Thy Holy Spirit, and destroy the enemy’s devices which are against 
us.  
And he saith this prayer following the preceding one: 
Blessed art Thou, O Almighty Master, Who hast enlightened the day with 
the light of the sun and hast illumined the night by the rays of fire, Who hast 
deemed us worthy to pass through the length of the day and draw nigh to the 
beginning of the night. Hearken unto our supplication, and that of all Thy 
people. Forgive all of us our sins, voluntary and involuntary, accept our evening 
entreaties, and send down the multitude of Thy mercy and compassions upon 
Thine inheritance. Encompass us with Thy holy angels; arm us with the armor 
of Thy righteousness; surround us with Thy truth; protect us by Thy might; 
deliver us from every grievous circumstance and from every conspiracy of the 
adversary. And grant unto us that this evening together with the coming night 
and all the days of our life may be perfect, holy, peaceful, sinless, without 
stumbling and vain imaginings; by the intercessions of the holy Theotokos and 
of all the Saints, who, from ages past, have been wellpleasing unto Thee. 
Priest/Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up, and keep 
us, God, by Thy grace. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. (Once) 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Priest/Deacon: Calling to remembrance our most holy, immaculate, 
most blessed, glorious Lady Theotokos and Ever-virgin Mary with all the 
Saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and all our life unto 
Christ our God. 
Choir: To Thee O Lord. (Once) 
The Priest: For Thine it is to have mercy and to save us, O our God, and 
unto Thee do we send up glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the 
Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
 
The Litany: Let us say with our whole soul ..., and the rest, as usual. 
After which the Deacon or Priest saith the following Litany: 
Exclamation: For a merciful God art Thou, and a Lover of mankind ...,  
Choir: Amen. 
 
Priest/Deacon: Again and again, on bended knees, let us pray to the 
Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. (Thrice) 
And the priest saith: 
O Lord Jesus Christ our God, Who hast granted Thy peace unto men, and 
Who, while yet present with us in this life, didst grant the faithful the gift of the 
all-holy Spirit for an inheritance that shall never be taken away; and Who on this 
day didst send down this grace manifestly unto Thy Disciples and apostles, and 
with tongues of fire didst strengthen their lips with eloquence, through which 
we, even every race of men, receiving divine knowledge by the hearing of the 
ear, each in his own tongue, have been enlightened by the light of the Spirit, and 
have been set free from error as from darkness; and by the distribution of the 
perceptible tongues of fire and their supra-natural energy, we have become 
disciples of faith in Thee; and we have been illumined to speak with divine 
authority concerning Thee, with the Father and the Holy Spirit in one Godhead 
and Power and Authority: Do Thou, O Effulgence of the Father and 
unchangeable and immutable express image of His essence and nature, Thou 
Fountain of salvation and grace, open also the lips of me, a sinner, and teach me 
how and for whom I should pray; for Thou art He that knoweth the great 
multitude of my sins, but Thy compassion shall overcome the boundlessness 
thereof. For behold, I stand before Thee in fear, casting my soul’s despair into 
the sea of Thy mercy. Govern my life, O Thou Who governest all of creation by 
a word and by the power of Thine ineffable wisdom, O tranquil Haven of them 

--- PAGE 6 ---
that are tempest-tossed, and make known unto me the way wherein I should 
walk. Grant unto my thoughts the spirit of Thy wisdom, bestowing upon my 
folly the spirit of understanding. Overshadow my deeds with the spirit of Thy 
fear and renew a right spirit within me, and with Thy governing Spirit establish 
mine unstable mind, that I may be counted worthy each day to do Thy 
commandments, being guided by Thy good Spirit toward that which is 
profitable, to ever keep in mind Thy glorious presence that searcheth out those 
things wrought by us. And overlook me not, lest I be deceived by the 
corrupting delights of this world, but strengthen me to yearn for the enjoyment 
of the treasures to come. For Thou didst say, O Master, that, whatsoever ye ask 
in My Name, ye shall receive unhindered from God the Father, Who is co-
eternal with Me. Wherefore also I, a sinner, entreat Thy goodness at the descent 
of Thy Holy Spirit. Grant Thou unto me those things I have prayed for that are 
unto salvation: Yea, O Lord, Who art the Good and abundantly bestowing 
Giver of every benefaction. For Thou art He that granteth supremely more than 
we ask. Thou art the Compassionate and Merciful One, Who without sin hast 
become a partaker with us in the flesh, and Who, in Thy loving compassion, 
dost incline unto them that bend the knee before Thee, W/ho art become the 
Forgiveness of our sins. Grant, O Lord, Thy compassions unto Thy people, 
hearken unto us from Thy holy heaven, sanctify them by the might of Thy 
saving right hand, shelter them in the shelter of Thy wings, disdain not the 
works of Thy hands. Against Thee only have we sinned, but to Thee alone do 
We offer adoration. A strange god we have not learned to worship, O Master, 
nor have we lifted our hands to another god. Forgive our transgressions, and 
accepting our prayers with the bending of the knees, extend unto us all a 
helping hand; accept the prayer of all as acceptable incense rising before Thy 
supremely good Kingdom. 
He addeth this prayer also: 
Lord, O Lord, that hast delivered us from every arrow that flieth by day, do 
Thou deliver us also from every thing that walketh in darkness. Accept the 
lifting up of our hands as an evening sacrifice. And grant us blamelessly to pass 
through the course of the night, being un-tempted of evils; and deliver us from 
every troubling and fear which cometh to us of the devil. Grant compunction to 
our souls; and to our thoughts, mindfulness of the inquisition at Thy terrible 
and just judgment. Nail down our flesh with the fear of Thee, and mortify our 
members which are upon the earth, that through the quiet of sleep we may 
rejoice in the vision of Thy judgments. And remove from us every shameful 
imagining and hurtful desire. And raise us up at the hour of prayer, established 
in faith, and advancing in Thy commandments. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Priest/Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up, and keep 
us, O God, by Thy grace.. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. (Once) 
Priest/Deacon: Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most 
blessed, glorious Lady Theotokos and Ever-virgin Mary with all the 
Saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and all our life unto 
Christ our God. 
Choir: To Thee O Lord. 
The priest: By the good pleasure and grace of Thine Only-begotten Son, 
with Whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy most holy and good 
and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
The choir: Amen. 
 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
Priest/Deacon: Again and again, on bended knees, let us pray to the 
Lord. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. (Thrice) 
And the priest saith this prayer: 
O Thou ever-flowing, living, and enlightening Fountain, Thou creative 
Power, co-eternal with the Father, Who for the salvation of mortals hast 
fulfilled Thy whole dispensation in a manner transcending beauty, O Christ our 
God; Who didst shatter the indestructible bonds of death and the bolts of 
Hades, and didst trample down the multitudes of evil spirits; Who didst offer 
Thyself as a blameless Offering on our behalf, giving over unto sacrifice Thine 
immaculate Body, which was untouched by and inaccessible to all sin; Who, 
through this dread and indescribable sacred ministry didst grant us life 
everlasting; Who didst descend into Hades and didst shatter the everlasting 
bars, showing an ascent unto them that sat below; Who with divinely-wise bait 
didst hook the author of evil, the dragon of the deep, binding him in Tartarus 
with bonds of darkness, and by Thine infinitely powerful might imprisoning 
him in unquenchable fire and outer darkness; O Wisdom of the Father, Thou of 
great Name, Who dost manifest Thyself a great Helper to them that are in 
distress; Who hast enlightened them that sit in darkness and the shadow of 
death: Do Thou, O Lord of everlasting glory, and beloved Son of the Most 
High Father, everlasting Light from everlasting Light; O Sun of Righteousness, 
hearken unto us who pray Thee, and grant rest unto the souls of Thy servants, 
our fathers and brethren, and the rest of our kinsmen according to the flesh, 

--- PAGE 8 ---
and all them that are of the household of the Faith, who have fallen asleep 
before us, for whom also we now celebrate this memorial; for in Thee is the 
might of all, and Thou dost hold all the ends of the earth in Thy hand. O 
Almighty Master, God of our Fathers and Lord of mercy and Creator of the 
race of both the mortal and the immortal, and of all human nature, of that 
which is brought together and again put asunder, of life and death, of the 
course of life here and the translation yonder; Who settest the years for the 
living and appointest the time for death; Who bringest down to Hades, and 
bringest back up; Who bindest with weakness, and loosest with power; Who 
providest the present things for our benefit, and Who governest the future as is 
meet; Who givest life through hope of resurrection unto them that are wounded 
with the sting of death: Do Thou Thyself, O Master of all things, our God and 
Savior, Thou Hope of all the ends of the earth and of them that be far off at 
sea, Who on this last and great and saving day of Pentecost hast shown unto us 
the mystery of the Holy Trinity, one in essence and co-eternal, indivisible and 
unmingled, and the descent and presence of Thy Holy and Life-creating Spirit, 
poured forth upon Thy holy apostles in the likeness of tongues of fire, 
establishing them as proclaimers of the good tidings of our pious Faith, and 
showing them forth as confessors and heralds of true theology; Who on this all-
perfect and saving Feast hast vouchsafed to accept the supplicatory prayers of 
forgiveness for them that are held in Hades; Who grantest us great hope that 
unto the departed held in the bondage of grief, there be sent from Thee rest 
and refreshment: Hearken unto us, the lowly and wretched, who pray unto 
Thee, and grant rest unto the souls of Thy servants that have fallen asleep 
before us, in a place of light, a place of verdure, in a place of refreshment, 
where all pain, sorrow, and sighing are fled away; and establish their spirits in 
the tabernacles of the righteous, and vouchsafe unto them peace and rest; for it 
is not the dead that shall praise Thee, O Lord, nor shall they that are in Hades 
dare to offer thanks unto Thee, but we, the living, bless and entreat Thee, and 
offer unto Thee reconciliatory prayers and sacrifices on behalf of their souls. 
This prayer is also added: 
O God, Thou Great and Eternal One, Thou Holy One and Friend of man, 
Who hast deemed us worthy to stand at this hour before Thine unapproachable 
glory to hymn and praise Thy wonders: Be gracious unto us, Thine unworthy 
servants, and grant us grace, that with a contrite heart we may humbly offer 
Thee the thrice-holy glorification and thanksgiving for Thy great gifts which 
Thou hast wrought and dost always work for us. Remember, O Lord, our 
weakness, and destroy us not in our iniquities; but in our humiliation show us 
Thy great mercy, that fleeing from the darkness of sin, we may walk in the day 

--- PAGE 9 ---
of righteousness, and being clad with the weapons of light, we may persevere 
unassailed by all the assaults of the evil one, and with boldness offer unto Thee, 
the only true and man-befriending God, glory for all things. For, O Master and 
Creator of all, great indeed and in truth is this, Thy mystery, even the temporary 
dissolution of Thy creatures, and their restoration thereafter and repose unto 
the ages. In all things we acknowledge Thy favor, at our coming into this world 
and at our going out there from, which betroth unto us beforehand the hopes 
of resurrection and everlasting life through Thine unfailing promise, which may 
we enjoy at Thy Second Coming. For Thou art the Author of our resurrection, 
the impartial and man-befriending judge of deeds committed in lifetime, the 
rewarding Lord and Master, Who by extreme condescension art become a 
partaker with us of like flesh and blood, and of our blameless passions, which 
Thou didst willingly accept to experience in Thy bowels of compassion; and in 
that Thou Thyself hadst suffered being tempted, Thou didst of Thine own free 
will become a Helper for us that are tempted; wherefore, Thou hast led us into 
Thine own passionlessness. Therefore, O Master, accept our prayers and 
supplications, and grant rest unto all the fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, and 
children of each of us, and to any others of our kinsmen and people, and all the 
souls of them that have gone to rest before us in the hope of the resurrection of 
life everlasting; and establish their souls and names in the Book of Life, in the 
bosom of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob; in the land of the living, in the 
Kingdom of the heavens, in the Paradise of delight, guiding them all into Thy 
holy mansions by Thy radiant angels; raise up our bodies on the day that Thou 
hast appointed, according to Thy holy and unfailing promise. For there is no 
death, O Lord, for us, Thy servants, that have departed from the body and 
come unto Thee, O God, but rather a translation from things sorrowful unto 
things better and more delightful, and unto repose and joy. And if we have 
sinned in anything against Thee, be Thou merciful unto us and unto them; for 
there is none pure of stain before Thee, even though his life be but for a day, 
save Thee alone, Who didst appear on earth without sin, O our Lord Jesus 
Christ, through Whom we all hope to attain mercy and the remission of sins. 
For this cause, since Thou art a good and man-befriending God, remit, pardon, 
and forgive our offences and theirs, committed both voluntarily and 
involuntarily, in knowledge or ignorance, those manifest, those forgotten, those 
in deed, in thought, in word, in all our conversations and movements; and grant 
unto them that have preceded us, freedom and rest, and bless us who are here 
present, granting a good and peaceful end unto us and all Thy people, and open 
unto us Thy bowels of mercy and love for man at Thy dread and fearful 
coming; and make us worthy also of Thy Kingdom. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
This prayer is added also: 
O God, great and Most High, Who alone hast immortality and dwellest in 
light unapproachable; Who hast fashioned all creation in wisdom; Who hast 
divided between the light and the darkness, and hast appointed the sun for 
dominion of the day, and the moon and the stars for dominion of the night; 
Who has counted us sinners worthy at this present day also to come before Thy 
Countenance with thanksgiving, to offer unto Thee our evening adoration: Do 
Thou Thyself, O man-befriending Lord, direct our prayer as incense before 
Thee, and accept it for a savor of sweet fragrance. Grant that the present 
evening and the coming night may be peaceful; array us with the armor of light; 
deliver us from the terror by night, and from every thing that walketh in 
darkness; and grant us sleep, which Thou hast given for the repose of our 
infirmity, free from all diabolical imagining, O Master of all, Bestower of good 
things: so that we, being moved to compunction upon our beds, may call to 
remembrance Thy most holy Name in the night also, and being enlightened by 
the meditation on Thy commandments, we may rise up in joyfulness of soul to 
glorify Thy goodness, offering up prayers and supplications unto Thy loving 
kindness, for our own sins and for those of all Thy people, whom do Thou visit 
in Thy mercy, through the intercessions of the holy Theotokos. For a good and 
man-befriending God art Thou, and unto Thee do we send up glory, to the 
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages 
of ages. Amen. 
Priest/Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, raise us up, and keep 
us, O God, by Thy grace.. 
Choir: Lord have mercy. (Once) 
Priest/Deacon: Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most 
blessed, glorious Lady Theotokos and Ever-virgin Mary with all the 
Saints, let us commit ourselves and one another and all our life unto 
Christ our God. 
Choir: To Thee O Lord. 
The priest: For Thou art the repose of our souls and bodies, and unto 
Thee do we send up glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy 
Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
The choir: Amen. 
 
The Litany: Let us complete ..., and the rest, as usual. 
After which the Deacon or Priest saith the following Litany: 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Exclamation: For a good God art Thou, and the Lover of mankind, and 
unto Thee do we send up glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the 
Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
The Priest: Peace be unto all. 
Choir: And to thy spirit. 
Priest/Deacon: Bow your heads unto the Lord. 
Choir: To Thee O Lord. 
And the priest saith this prayer silently: 
O Lord our God, Who didst bow the heavens and come down for the 
salvation of the race of mankind, look upon Thy servants and upon Thine 
inheritance. For unto Thee, the Lover of mankind and fearful judge, have Thy 
servants inclined their heads and bowed their necks, looking for succor not 
from men, but abiding Thy mercy, and awaiting Thy salvation. Keep them at all 
times, especially in the present evening and the approaching night, from every 
foe, from every adverse operation of the devil, from vain reasonings, and from 
evil imaginings.  
Exclamation: Blessed and glorified be the dominion of Thy Kingdom, of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
The choir: Amen. 
On the Aposticha, we chant the following Stichera, in Tone III: 
Now are the tongues manifestly become a sign unto all; * for ailing with 
unbelief, the Jews, * from whom Christ came according to the flesh, * have fell 
away from the divine grace and the divine light, * of which we, the nations, have 
been deemed worthy, * made steadfast by the words of the disciples, * who 
spake of the glory of God, the Benefactor of all. * Together with them, as we 
bend our hearts and our knees, * let us worship the Holy Spirit in faith, ** made 
steadfast by the Savior of our souls.  
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
Now the Comforting Spirit hath been poured out upon all flesh; * for 
beginning with the assembly of the apostles, * from them He hath extended 
grace to the believers by participation. * And confirmeth His mighty descent by 
the distribution of tongues * in the likeness of fire * unto the disciples, to the 
praise and glory of God. * Wherefore, noetically illumined in our hearts, * and 
made steadfast in faith by the Holy Spirit, ** we beseech Thee that our souls be 
saved. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Now the apostles of Christ are clothed with might from on high; * for the 
Comforter doth renew them, * working renewal in them with mystical newness 
of knowledge, * which they proclaim to us by foreign voices and lofty words, * 
and they teach us to reverence the eternal, * simple, and tri-hypostatic nature of 
God, the Benefactor of all. * Wherefore, illumined by their teachings, let us 
worship the Father with the Son and the Spirit, ** beseeching that our souls be 
saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Come, O ye peoples, let us worship the Godhead of three Hypostases: * the 
Son in the Father, with the Holy Spirit; * for the Father timelessly begat the 
Son, Who is co-eternal and of one throne; * and the Holy Spirit was in the 
Father, * glorified with the Son; * one Might, one Essence, one Godhead, * 
which we all worship, saying: * Holy God, Who didst create all things through 
the Son, * with the co-operation of the Holy Spirit. * Holy Mighty, through 
Whom we have known the Father, * and through Whom the Holy Spirit came 
into the world. * Holy Immortal One, the Comforting Spirit, * Who proceedest 
from the Father and restest in the Son. ** O Holy Trinity, glory be to Thee. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Lord have mercy (Thrice), (Father/Master) 
bless. 
 
 
The Dismissal: 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Priest: Christ our true God, Who emptied Himself from the Father’s 
bosom, having taken upon Himself our human nature wholly and having 
deified it, and Who thereafter ascending straightway into the heavens and 
sitting at the right hand of God the Father, then sent down the divine, 
holy, consubstantial, and co-eternal Spirit, equal in might and glory, upon 
His holy Disciples and apostles, and through Him, having illumined 
them, and through them, the whole world, by the intercessions of His 
all-immaculate and all-immaculate holy Mother, of the holy, glorious, all-
famed, God-proclaiming, and Spirit-bearing apostles, and of all the 
Saints, may He have mercy and save us for the sake of His goodness. 
Amen. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
MONDAY IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the Great Litany: “God is the 
Lord ...,” in Tone VIII, and then: 
The Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. IV) The following Sessional Hymn 
of the Feast Tone IV: 
O ye faithful, let us radiantly celebrate * this post-festal and last feast; * this 
is the day of Pentecost, * which doth fulfill the appointed time and the promise. 
* For on this day, the fire of the Comforter came down unto the earth * in the 
form of fiery tongues, * and it enlightened the disciples * and proved them 
heaven’s initiates. ** Lo the Comforter’s light hath come and illumined the 
World.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. V) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
The spring of the Holy Spirit hath descended upon the earth, * in the form 
of fiery streams apportioned noetically to all, * as it bedewed and enlightened 
the apostles. * The fire became a cloud bedewing them, * filling them with light, 
and raining flames upon them. * And through them, grace hath been granted to 
us by fire and water. ** Lo the Comforter’s light hath come and illumined the 
World.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons: 8 Troparia from the 1st Canon, 
and four from the 2nd Canon, to make 12 in each Ode. 
The first Canon, by Cosmos the Monk, in Tone VII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: He Who quencheth wars with a lofty arm * hath covered over 
Pharaoh and his chariots in the sea. * Let us sing unto Him, * for He 
hath been glorified. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As of old Thou didst promise the disciples, O Christ Who didst send the 
Spirit Comforter, Thou didst indeed shine forth light upon the world, O Thou 
Who lovest mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
That which of old was preached by the Law and the prophets hath been 
fulfilled; for today the grace of the divine Spirit hath been poured out upon all 
the faithful. 
The second Canon, by Kyr John Arclas, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Covered by the divine cloud ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The pure and revered mouth spake: From you there shall be no separation, 
O My friends! For, seated together upon the Father’s most high throne, I will 
pour out the Spirit, to enlighten them that desire abundant grace. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Having reached the end, the Word most true calmly 
perfecteth the heart; for having finished His work, Christ gladdened His friends, 
giving them the Spirit in a mighty wind with tongues of fire. 
Katavasia: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of tongue 
proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the impurity 
from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is initiated 
into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-inspired 
songs. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou didst say unto Thy disciples, O Christ: * Tarry ye in 
Jerusalem * till ye be clothed with power from on high, * and I will send 
you another Comforter like unto Me, * Who is My Spirit and the Spirit of 
the Father, * in Whom ye shall be established. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The power of the divine Spirit coming down divinely joined together into 
one, the divided tongues of those who of old had come to a wicked agreement, 
thereby imparting unto the faithful the knowledge of the Trinity, in which we 
are established. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: Only the prayer of the prophetess ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Incomprehensible is the supreme Godhead, for it hath shown the illiterate 
fishermen to be wise men who with their speech stopped the mouths of the 
sophists, and brought out of the deepest night countless peoples, through the 
brilliance of the Spirit. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., From unbegotten Light the all-effecting never-failing 
Brightness doth proceed, Who now shineth forth the radiance one in nature, of 
the Father’s power, through the Son, unto the nations in the fiery voice on 
Zion. 
Katavasia: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought 
a broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed 
the fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with 
children. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The all-holy Spirit, having now come down upon the blessed apostles * in 
the form of fire, * filled with astonishment all the nations assembled there. * 
For, O Lover of mankind, * as they spoke with fiery tongues, * everyone there 
present heard the speech in his native tongue. * While the miracle was taken to 
be drunkenness by the unbelieving, * it truly led those with faith to salvation. * 
For this cause we glorify Thy sovereignty O Christ God, * asking that the 
remission of our sins, ** be sent down in abundance upon Thy servants.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
ODE IV 
Irmos: When the prophet perceived Thy coming in the last days, O 
Christ, * he cried out: I have heard of Thy might, O Lord, * that Thou 
hast come to save all Thine anointed ones. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
He that formerly spake through the prophets, and was foretold in the law 
unto the imperfect, the Comforter, the true God, doth become known today 
unto the ministers and witnesses of the Word. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Bearing the sign of Divinity, the Spirit was distributed in fire upon the 
apostles, and was manifested in strange tongues, for the divine Power coming 
from the Father is absolute. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: O King of kings, even Thou Who art ..., 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having by word thrown open the divine laver of regeneration, Thou, O 
Word of God, Compound Nature, dost bathe me with streams from Thine 
incorrupt, pierced side, sealing with the fervor of the Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
All things bow their knees unto the Comforter, and unto the Son of the 
Father, and unto the consubstantial Father, for in Three Hypostases they saw 
the true Being, inaccessible, timeless, and one; for the grace of the Spirit hath 
shone forth light. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Be ye perfected by the supreme Godhead, all ye 
ministers of the Thrice-radiant Essence; for, beyond nature, Christ as 
Benefactor doth work perfection, making light shine unto salvation, providing 
all the grace of the Spirit. 
Katavasia: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.  
ODE V 
Irmos: The Spirit of salvation, O Lord, * Who was conceived in the loins 
of the prophets because of their fear of Thee * and was brought forth 
upon the earth, * doth purify the hearts of the apostles, * and is renewed 
in an upright manner in the faithful; * for Thy commandments are light 
and peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
This power that came down today is the Good Spirit, the Spirit of the 
wisdom of God, the Spirit that proceedeth from the Father, and through the 
Son hath appeared unto us the faithful, presented in the holiness of His nature, 
unto those in whom He dwelleth, and in whom He is seen. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: O ye children of the Church ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As He Himself was well-pleased, of His own accord the unsubordinated 
Spirit cometh forth from the Father, making wise with tongues the apostles, 
sealing with the impress of the life-bearing Word, being of One Might with the 
Father, and One Form, of Whom the Savior spake also. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., That He might heal the minds of sin, the All-ruling 
God and Word doth prepare for Himself as a spotless dwelling the apostles, in 
whom the light of the Spirit, One in might and essence with Him, doth now 
make Its abode. 
Katavasia: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto 
light, * receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a 
redeeming purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth 
from Zion, * even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship 
I have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the 
deadly abyss.. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Of Thy Spirit hast Thou abundantly poured out upon all flesh, according as 
Thou hast said, O Lord, and all things are filled with Thy knowledge, for Thou, 
the Son didst come forth from the Father immutably, and the Spirit indivisibly 
proceedeth. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: Thou hast shown forth from the Virgin ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Do Thou renew within us, that we may for ever possess the right Spirit that 
we long for, Who proceedeth from the Father always invisibly, consuming the 
stains of hated matter and cleansing the filth of our minds, O Ruler of all. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., A long-desired dignity dost Thou establish for the 
apostles in Zion mindful of Thy coming, O Spirit: the profession of the Word 
Begotten of the Father, which swiftly exposed the cruel prattle of the heathens’ 
babbling. 
Katavasia: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Ikos: Grant speedy and steadfast consolation unto Thy servants, O Jesus, 
when our spirits are become despondent. Depart not from our souls when they 
be in afflictions, nor be Thou afar from our minds when they be in tribulations, 
but do Thou ever go before us. Draw nigh unto us, draw nigh, O Thou Who art 
everywhere present; and even as Thou wast ever with Thine apostles, so also do 
Thou unite Thyself to them that long for Thee, O compassionate One, that, 
being one with Thee, we may praise and glorify Thine all-holy Spirit. 
SYNAXARION READING 
On this day, the Monday of Pentecost, we celebrate the all-holy and Life-
Creating and Omnipotent Spirit, Who as God, and one of the Holy Trinity, and 
of one Honor, and one Essence, and one Glory, with Father and the Son. 
Verse: O every breath, glorify the Spirit of the Lord. 
Verse: Through Whom the impudence of evil spirits is put to flight. 
On this day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit descended upon the Holy apostles 
concretely in the form of fiery tongues, sitting upon each of them in the upper 
room in which they were staying. In honor of the Holy Spirit, the divine 
Fathers, who have arranged all things well, decreed that we celebrate this event 
both separately and on the actual day of Pentecost. For, before His Passion, the 
Savior promised the coming of the Holy Spirit, saying; It is expedient for you 
that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; (St. 
John 16:7). And again: “When He cometh, He will teach you and will guide you 
into all truth” (St. John 14:26; 16:13). And again: “And I will pray the Father, 
and he shall send you another Comforter, the Spirit of truth, Who proceedeth 
from the Father” (John 14:16; 15:26). And again, after the Passion, when He 
was ascending to heaven, He said: “Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be 
endued with power from on high” (St. Luke 24:49). Therefore, having made 
these promises, He sent the Holy Spirit when the day of Pentecost came, while 
the Disciples were waiting in the upper room around the third hour of the day, 
it suddenly thundered from heaven, to such an extent that it resounded 
throughout the inhabited earth; and the Holy Spirit appeared in the form of 
fiery tongues to each one of them, and not only to the Twelve, but also to the 
Seventy, and they spoke in foreign tongues, that is, each of the apostles spoke 
the languages of all the nations. However, it was not so much that a foreigner 
heard an apostle speaking his own language, but rather, that the apostle heard 
and spoke the language of each nation; hence, to those who had gathered they 
appeared to be drunk; for, not understanding how each apostle could be 
conversing with them all individually, they supposed that he was drunk. Others 

--- PAGE 20 ---
were amazed, saying: “What is the meaning of this? These latter had assembled 
from all parts of the earth for the Feast; Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, who 
had some time previously been taken captive by Antiochos.” The Holy Spirit 
descended after the Ascension, ten days having elapsed, and not immediately 
after the Ascension, so that the Lord might make the Disciples more fervent as 
they awaited the Spirit. Some say that on each of these days each of the angelic 
Orders approached and adored that deified flesh of the Lord. Therefore, after 
nine days were fulfilled, the Holy Spirit descended, when reconciliation had 
taken place through the Son, fifty days after Pascha, in commemoration of the 
old Law; for, Israel received the Decalogue fifty days after crossing the Red Sea. 
Consider also the symbols: there a mountain, here the upper room; there fire, 
here tongues of fire; instead of thunder and darkness, here there is a mighty 
wind. The Holy Spirit descended in the form of tongues, because this shows 
His affinity with the living Word; or because the apostles were going to teach 
and convert the nations through the tongue; tongues of fire, because God is a 
consuming fire (Hebrews 12:29), and also because fire has the property of 
cleansing; they were divided because of the different gifts of the Spirit. And just 
as at one time He divided into many languages and confounded those who 
knew one language, so also now He divided into many languages those who 
knew one language, in order to gather together those who were scattered by 
those languages into the ends of the inhabited earth. The descent of the Spirit 
took place on the Feast in order that, with many people gathered together, the 
event might be recounted everywhere, and in order that those who happened to 
be there at the Passover and who saw what happened to Christ might be able to 
marvel. It occurred on Pentecost, because it was necessary that the Grace of the 
Spirit be poured out at the same time that the Law was given of old, just as 
Christ did on the Judaic Passover when He celebrated the proper Passover, the 
true Passover. The Holy Spirit did not sit in the mouths of the apostles, but 
upon their heads, encompassing the nous itself, the principal part of the soul, 
and one which is superior to the body, from which the tongue derives the 
power of speech; or because the Spirit somehow emitted a sound through the 
tongues of fire when He Ordained the apostles by touching their heads to be 
teachers of the entire world; for the laying on of hands is performed upon the 
head. The sound and the fire were manifested because these things occurred on 
Mount Sinai, so as to show that it was the same Spirit both then and now that 
gave the Law and appointed all things. The multitude was confounded by the 
sound of the wind, because they thought that all the predictions which Christ 
had made to the Jews about their destruction had come to pass. St. Luke said 

--- PAGE 21 ---
“tongues as of fire” (Acts 2:3), lest anyone should think about the Holy Spirit in 
corporeal terms. The apostles were condemned for drunkenness. But Peter 
stood up and spoke in the midst of the crowd and exposed the falsity of this 
claim, citing the prophecy of Joel in his speech, and he converted about three 
thousand of them (Acts 2:41). The Holy Spirit is called the Comforter, since He 
is able to comfort and refresh us, and because in His love for mankind He 
intercedes before God for us with unutterable sounds (Romans 8:26), as our 
Advocate, just as Christ also does. For He, too, is called a Comforter or 
Advocate; for this reason, the Holy Spirit is said to be another Comforter. The 
apostle says: “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous” 
(I St. John 2:1). The Holy Spirit is called “another” Comforter because He is co-
essential with the Father and the Son; for the adjective “another “ (in the 
masculine gender) is applied to things of the same essence and nature, whereas 
we are accustomed to apply different (in the neuter gender) to different natures. 
The Holy Spirit is in both the Father and the Son in every respect. Hence, 
together with Them He creates the universe and the future resurrection, and He 
does whatsoever He wills; He sanctifies, appoints, renews, sends out, makes 
wise, and anoints the prophets. To put it simply, He does all things, possessing 
sovereignty of will and being almighty, good, upright, and governing. Through 
Him come all wisdom, life, and movement, whatever participates in holiness 
and life of any kind; in short, He has whatever the Father and the Son have, 
except for non-generation and generation, for He proceeds from the Father. 
When the Spirit was poured out upon all flesh, the world was filled with 
spiritual gifts of every kind, and through Him all the nations were guided to the 
knowledge of God, and every disease and infirmity was banished. Three times 
was the Holy Spirit given by Christ to the apostles: before the Passion very 
indistinctly; more manifestly after the Resurrection, through insufflations; and 
now Christ sent Him down in concrete form; or rather, He descended, 
illuminating and sanctifying the apostles more perfectly; and through them He 
reclaims the ends of the earth. 
By the visitation of the Holy Spirit and the intercessions of the apostles, O 
Christ God, have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed 
the fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O 
Lord, the God of our fathers!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
While the apostles proclaimed the great divine things, the unbelievers 
considered as drunkenness the working of the Spirit, through Whom the Trinity 
becometh known, the one God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The indivisible Nature do we theologize in Orthodox manner: God the 
beginningless Father, the Word and Spirit of the same authority, and we cry: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: The harmonious music of the flutes ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Not understanding the prophetic voice, but hearing the apostles speak in 
strange tongues, the foolish called it drunkenness caused by wine; whereas we 
the pious fittingly call out to Thee: O Renewer of all things, blessed art Thou! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The divinely-inspired seer of visions, Joel, thundered forth a divine saying, 
as if spoken by the Word of the supreme Godhead: They on whom I will pour 
out my Spirit, shall exclaim together: O Nature, splendid with the Triple 
Radiance, blessed art Thou! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., At the third hour grace was seen to be well 
distributed, that it might indicate the worship of Three Hypostases in a 
simplicity of authority, but now we see in that unity on this, the Lord’s day, the 
Son, the Father and the blessed Spirit! 
Katavasia: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor 
the lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the 
Comforter * doth inspire us to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * 
equal in might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow 
of speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for 
God showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be 
unvanquished by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
When the quickening mighty breath of the all-holy Spirit came down from 
on high upon the fishermen in the form of tongues of fire, they proclaimed the 
greatness of God: All ye works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Without dreading the fearful fire and like those treading up the untouchable 
mountain, come, let us stand upon Mount Zion, in the city of the living God, 
singing in choir together with the Spirit-bearing apostles: All ye works, praise ye 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: The type of the Godhead ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The Spirit coming down in likeness of the tongues of fire, doth impress 
upon the memory of the apostles the man-saving doctrine which Christ Who 
heard it from the Father, declared unto them. Creation, formerly alienated and 
now reconciled, doth praise Thee. 
Refrain: We bless Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
O Light self-radiant and the cause of light, being alone self-mastering, unto 
salvation hast Thou come filling the apostles, esteemed as the summit by Thy 
servants. O that Thou shouldest grant the Spirit in great abundance! 
 Both now ..., The Spirit-sated mouth of the prophets sang of Thy 
sojourning in the flesh, O Sovereign; and the Spirit, brought forth from the 
Father’s bosom, Uncreated, Co-Creator and Co-enthroned with Thee, is 
revered by those who believe in a singular incarnation. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
(The Magnificat is not sung)  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh 
to the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, 
* thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Borne in gladness upon a chariot of flaming fire, the fire-breathing zealot of 
old typified that radiant breath which now shone forth from above upon the 
apostles, and these, illumined, made known the Trinity to all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Strange things were heard from the disciples, not in accordance with the law 
of their nature, for while only one voice spake, by the grace of the Spirit various 
peoples, tribes, and nations heard the great things of God, learning the 
knowledge of the Trinity. 
The second Canon: 
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
It is proper to hymn the maiden who giveth life; for she alone carried in her 
womb the Word that came to heal the diseased nature of man; and Who seated 
now on the right hand of the father, hath sent down the grace of the Spirit. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Let all of us, on whom the divinely-poured grace 
hath breathed, shining, flashing, changed with a strange and most magnificent 
transformation, having come to know the Essence equal in might, indivisible, 
and wise, and thrice radiant, render glory. 
Katavasia: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and of mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
O Thou all-holy Spirit, * Who from the Father dost proceed, * and through 
the Son hast descended * on the unlettered disciples: * Do Thou now sanctify 
and save ** all that acknowledge Thee as God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
The Father is Light; the Word is Light; * and the Holy Spirit is Light, * Who 
was sent to the apostles * in the form of fiery tongues; * and thus through Him 
all creation ** is illumined and guided to worship the Holy Trinity. 
On the Praises, 6 Stichera in Tone II: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
In the prophets Thou didst proclaim unto us * the way of salvation, * and 
the grace of Thy Spirit hath shone in the apostles, O our Savior; * Thou art 
God Who art from the beginning, * and for time to come, ** and unto the ages, 
Thou art our God. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  

--- PAGE 25 ---
Repeat: In the prophets Thou didst proclaim ..., 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
In Thy courts shall I praise Thee, the Savior of the World, * and bending my 
knee I shall worship Thine invincible might. * In the evening, in the morn, at 
midday, ** and at all times shall I bless Thee, O Lord. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Repeat: In Thy courts shall I praise Thee ..., 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
In Thy courts, O Lord, * as we the faithful bend the knee of the soul and 
body, * we praise Thee, the beginningless Father, * the co-beginningless Son, * 
and the co-eternal and Most holy Spirit, ** Who dost enlighten and sanctity our 
souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Repeat: In Thy courts, O Lord ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Of old the tongues were confounded * because of the audacity in the 
building of the tower, * but now the tongues are made wise * because of the 
glory of divine knowledge. * There God condemned the impious because of 
their offence, * and here Christ hath enlightened the fishermen by the Spirit. * 
At that time the confusion of tongues was wrought for punishment, * but now 
the concord of tongues hath been inaugurated ** for the salvation of our souls.  
The Great Doxology 
Dismissal Troparion of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the Father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
MONDAY OF THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, at the Beatitudes, 8 verses from ODE III, and VI of the Canon. 
The power of the divine Spirit coming down divinely joined together into 
one, the divided tongues of those who of old had come to a wicked agreement, 
thereby imparting unto the faithful the knowledge of the Trinity, in which we 
are established. (Twice) 
Incomprehensible is the supreme Godhead, for it hath shown the illiterate 
fishermen to be wise men who with their speech stopped the mouths of the 
sophists, and brought out of the deepest night countless peoples, through the 
brilliance of the Spirit. 
From unbegotten Light the all-effecting never-failing Brightness doth 
proceed, Who now shineth forth the radiance one in nature, of the Father’s 
power, through the Son, unto the nations in the fiery voice on Zion. 
Of Thy Spirit hast Thou abundantly poured out upon all flesh, according as 
Thou hast said, O Lord, and all things are filled with Thy knowledge, for Thou, 
the Son didst come forth from the Father immutably, and the Spirit indivisibly 
proceedeth. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Do Thou renew within us, that we may for ever possess the right 
Spirit that we long for, Who proceedeth from the Father always invisibly, 
consuming the stains of hated matter and cleansing the filth of our minds, O 
Ruler of all. 
 Both now ..., A long-desired dignity dost Thou establish for the apostles in 
Zion mindful of Thy coming, O Spirit: the profession of the Word Begotten of 
the Father, which swiftly exposed the cruel prattle of the heathens’ babbling. 
At the Entrance, the Introit: 
Be Thou exalted, O Lord, in Thy strength; we will sing and chant of Thy 
mighty acts.  
Verse for the Hymn, O Come let us worship ...”: Save, O Good 
Comforter, us who chant to Thee: Alleluia. 
The Troparion for the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. **O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  

--- PAGE 28 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Kontakion of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
The Thrice-Holy Hymn is chanted: 
The Prokeimenon: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Save, O Lord, Thy people, * and bless Thine 
inheritance. 
Verse: Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, be not silent unto me. 
THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS: (5:9 - 19) 
Brethren, as children walk ye in the Light, for the fruit of the Spirit is in all 
goodness and righteousness and truth; Proving what is acceptable unto the 
Lord. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather 
reprove them. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of 
them in secret. But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light: 
for whatsoever doth make manifest is light. Wherefore he saith, Awake thou 
that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. See then 
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Redeeming the time, 
because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what 
the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be 
filled with the Spirit; Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord 
Alleluia, in Tone II: 
Verse: Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy. 
Verse: Turn not Thy face away from me, and take not Thy Holy Spirit 
from me. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (18:10 - 20) 
The Lord said: Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I 
say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my 
Father which is in heaven. For the Son of man is come to save that which was 
lost. How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone 
astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and 
seeketh that which is gone astray? And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto 

--- PAGE 29 ---
you, he rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went 
not astray. Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one 
of these little ones should perish. Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against 
thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, 
thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee 
one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may 
be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but 
if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a 
publican. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be 
bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in 
heaven. Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as 
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father 
which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, 
there am I in the midst of them.  
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of 
the Second Canon of the feast:  
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
 
The Communion Hymn: Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of 
uprightness. Alleluia. 
 
Note: During this entire week of Holy Pentecost, all foods are permitted. 
 
