--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning. The 6th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Now all peoples have been renewed * by God’s exalted deeds, * for by 
means of tongues in the likeness of fire, * all those who dwell on earth have 
been brought to the faith, * and that this sign unto the nations, ** hath declared 
that salvation is truly in our midst. 
Having fulfilled Thy promise * to send down power from on high * unto 
Thy disciples, O Christ, * Thou didst send Thy Holy Spirit, * thereby showing 
us that Thou art Truth, * and that those who hope in Thee O good One, ** 
shall in no wise ever be ashamed. 
At the time that was appointed, * Thou didst send into the world the Holy 
Spirit, * Who came in the form of tongues of fire. * All our sins are cleansed by 
this heavenly fire. * Thereby Thou hast granted us a true communion with Him, 
* for in pious faith ** we proclaim Him to be perfect God. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
We celebrate Pentecost * and the coming of the Spirit, * and the time 
appointed for the promise, * and the fulfillment of hope. * How great is this 
mystery: * it is both exceeding great and most venerable. * Wherefore, we cry 
unto Thee: ** O Creator of all, Lord, glory be to Thee. 
“O joyous Light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou 
didst hearken unto me. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the following Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
O Word, Thou didst send forth, * according to Thy promise, * the Spirit, 
Who is true God, * that He might dwell among Thy disciples ** and enlighten 
them. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
Suddenly, from on high, * the Comforter’s great power ** showed forth the 
Words * of the apostles’ as all-wise theologians ** who spake of things divine. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me 
Foreigners stood amazed, * upon hearing * the apostles speak * in every 
tongue, glorifying and magnifying ** God the Trinity. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Thou hast renewed Thy disciples with foreign tongues, O Christ, * that they 
might therewith proclaim Thee, * the immortal Word and God, ** Who 
granteth our souls great mercy. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both 
now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
TUESDAY IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., of the Feast: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VII) The following Sessional Hymn 
of the Feast, in Tone I: 
I equally glorify, honor, and reverence * the Father and the Son with the all-
holy Spirit, * three separate Hypostases but a single Divinity. * With which 
Christ’s apostles have now been clothed, ** and by which, imbued with 
supreme Wisdom, they preach throughout all the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. : 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. VIII) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Like fire, the grace of the Spirit * hath in awesome manner descended from 
heaven * and rested upon Christ’s disciples. * Whereby they became beacons of 
His light, * that they might declare the Holy Trinity’s oneness * and the unity of 
God’s dominion and power, ** which we glorify With faith. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, seven Troparia from the 1st Canon of 
the Feast with its Irmos, to make eight, and four from the Menaion, to make 
twelve in each Ode. After the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional 
Hymn from the Menaion Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of 
Pentecost. After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of Pentecost. After the 
Ninth Ode, the Exapostilarion of Pentecost, Glory ..., Menaion, Both now ..., of 
Pentecost. 
ODE I 
The first Canon, by Cosmos the Monk, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: He Who quencheth wars with a lofty arm * hath covered over 
Pharaoh and his chariots in the sea. * Let us sing unto Him, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
As of old Thou didst promise the disciples, O Christ Who didst send the 
Spirit Comforter, Thou didst indeed shine forth light upon the world, O Thou 
Who lovest mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
That which of old was preached by the Law and the prophets hath been 
fulfilled; for today the grace of the divine Spirit hath been poured out upon all 
the faithful. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of tongue 
proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the impurity 
from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is initiated 
into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-inspired 
songs. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou didst say unto Thy disciples, O Christ: * Tarry ye in 
Jerusalem * till ye be clothed with power from on high, * and I will send 
you another Comforter like unto Me, * Who is My Spirit and the Spirit of 
the Father, * in Whom ye shall be established. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The power of the divine Spirit coming down divinely joined together into 
one, the divided tongues of those who of old had come to a wicked agreement, 
thereby imparting unto the faithful the knowledge of the Trinity, in which we 
are established. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought 
a broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed 
the fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with 
children. 
Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymns from the Menaion, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The ardent followers of the Savior were filled with joy, * and they who were 
fearful before obtained boldness, * for today the Holy Spirit descended from on 
high upon the house of the disciples, * and each one spake differently to the 
people; * for the tongues, in likeness as of fire, were dispersed, yet burned them 
not, ** but rather bedewed them. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: When the prophet perceived Thy coming in the last days, O 
Christ, * he cried out: I have heard of Thy might, O Lord, * that Thou 
hast come to save all Thine anointed ones. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
He that formerly spake through the prophets, and was foretold in the law 
unto the imperfect, the Comforter, the true God, doth become known today 
unto the ministers and witnesses of the Word. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Bearing the sign of Divinity, the Spirit was distributed in fire upon the 
apostles, and was manifested in strange tongues, for the divine Power coming 
from the Father is absolute. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.  
ODE V 
Irmos: The Spirit of salvation, O Lord, * Who was conceived in the loins 
of the prophets because of their fear of Thee * and was brought forth 
upon the earth, * doth purify the hearts of the apostles, * and is renewed 
in an upright manner in the faithful; * for Thy commandments are light 
and peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
This power that came down today is the Good Spirit, the Spirit of the 
wisdom of God, the Spirit that proceedeth from the Father, and through the 
Son hath appeared unto us the faithful, presented in the holiness of His nature, 
unto those in whom He dwelleth, and in whom He is seen. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto 
light, * receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a 
redeeming purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth 
from Zion, * even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship 
I have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the 
deadly abyss.. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Of Thy Spirit hast Thou abundantly poured out upon all flesh, according as 
Thou hast said, O Lord, and all things are filled with Thy knowledge, for Thou, 
the Son didst come forth from the Father immutably, and the Spirit indivisibly 
proceedeth. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
Ikos: Grant speedy and steadfast consolation unto Thy servants, O Jesus, 
when our spirits are become despondent. Depart not from our souls when they 
be in afflictions, nor be Thou afar from our minds when they be in tribulations, 
but do Thou ever go before us. Draw nigh unto us, draw nigh, O Thou Who art 
everywhere present; and even as Thou wast ever with Thine apostles, so also do 
Thou unite Thyself to them that long for Thee, O compassionate One, that, 
being one with Thee, we may praise and glorify Thine all-holy Spirit. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed 
the fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O 
Lord, the God of our fathers!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
While the apostles proclaimed the great divine things, the unbelievers 
considered as drunkenness the working of the Spirit, through Whom the Trinity 
becometh known, the one God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The indivisible Nature do we theologize in Orthodox manner: God the 
beginningless Father, the Word and Spirit of the same authority, and we cry: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor 
the lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the 
Comforter * doth inspire us to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * 
equal in might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow 
of speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for 
God showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be 
unvanquished by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
When the quickening mighty breath of the all-holy Spirit came down from 
on high upon the fishermen in the form of tongues of fire, they proclaimed the 
greatness of God: All ye works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Without dreading the fearful fire and like those treading up the untouchable 
mountain, come, let us stand upon Mount Zion, in the city of the living God, 
singing in choir together with the Spirit-bearing apostles: All ye works, praise ye 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh 
to the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, 
* thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Borne in gladness upon a chariot of flaming fire, the fire-breathing zealot of 
old typified that radiant breath which now shone forth from above upon the 
apostles, and these, illumined, made known the Trinity to all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Strange things were heard from the disciples, not in accordance with the law 
of their nature, for while only one voice spake, by the grace of the Spirit various 
peoples, tribes, and nations heard the great things of God, learning the 
knowledge of the Trinity. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and of mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
O Thou all-holy Spirit, * Who from the Father dost proceed, * and through 
the Son hast descended * on the unlettered disciples: * Do Thou now sanctify 
and save ** all that acknowledge Thee as God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (From the Menaion, if any) Both now ..., 
The Father is Light; the Word is Light; * and the Holy Spirit is Light, * Who 
was sent to the apostles * in the form of fiery tongues; * and thus through Him 
all creation ** is illumined and guided to worship the Holy Trinity 
On the Praises, The usual Psalm, if there are Stichera for Praises from 
the Menaion they are included. After the chanting of Praises: 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O House of Ephratha ...”: 
The brightness sprung from God * illumined Thy disciples. * Thus were 
their minds * made radiant, and they received the Spirit ** in very truth, O 
Word of God. 
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
Tongues as it were of fire * were seen to come from heaven * and rest on 
the apostles. * While cloven, they illumined, ** neither consuming nor burning. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Come to us from on high, * O Comforter, as Thou didst * descend on the 
apostles. * Thus sanctify and save us all who ** proclaim Thee as true God. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
The Holy Spirit provideth all things; * He gusheth forth prophecy; * He 
perfecteth the priesthood; * He hath taught wisdom to the illiterate. * He hath 
shown forth the fishermen as theologians. * He holdeth together the whole 
institution of the Church. * Wherefore, O Comforter, * one in essence and 
throne with the Father and the Son, ** glory be to Thee. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both 
now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the Father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
TUESDAY OF THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE I of both Canons. 
As of old Thou didst promise the disciples, O Christ Who didst send the 
Spirit Comforter, Thou didst indeed shine forth light upon the world, O Thou 
Who lovest mankind. (Twice) 
That which of old was preached by the Law and the prophets hath been 
fulfilled; for today the grace of the divine Spirit hath been poured out upon all 
the faithful. 
The pure and revered mouth spake: From you there shall be no separation, 
O My friends! For, seated together upon the Father’s most high throne, I will 
pour out the Spirit, to enlighten them that desire abundant grace. (Twice) 
Having reached the end, the Word most true calmly perfecteth the heart; for 
having finished His work, Christ gladdened His friends, giving them the Spirit 
in a mighty wind with tongues of fire. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion of the Feast Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. **O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the day, 
if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory ..., (for the Saint, if there 
be any), Otherwise 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
The Prokeimenon: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the works of His hands. 
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: (1:1-7; 13-17) 
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the 
gospel of God, (Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy 
scriptures,) Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the 

--- PAGE 11 ---
seed of David according to the flesh; And declared to be the Son of God with 
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead: By 
whom we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith 
among all nations, for his name: Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus 
Christ: To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you 
and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Now I would not 
have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but 
was let hitherto,) that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among 
other Gentiles. I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to 
the wise, and to the unwise. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the 
gospel to you that are at Rome also. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to 
the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God 
revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith. 
Alleluia in Tone I: 
Verse: By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established, and all the 
might of them by the Spirit of His mouth. 
Verse: The Lord looked down from heaven, He beheld all the sons of 
men. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (4:25 - 5:13) 
At that time: there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, 
and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond 
Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he 
was set, his disciples came unto him: And he opened his mouth, and taught 
them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: 
for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall 
obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are 
the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall 
say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding 
glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets 
which were before you. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his 
savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to 
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of 
the Second Canon of the feast:  
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
 
The Communion Hymn: Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of 
uprightness. Alleluia. 
 
 
