--- PAGE 1 ---
TUESDAY EVENING IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning. The 9th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
It is proper and natural * that the rational heavens proclaim with tongues of 
fire * unto all the nations, * the glory of God, * Who hath adorned the heavens 
by means of fire; * and Who, by the Son and the Spirit, * hath rendered 
luminous ** the world which our senses know. 
When Christ’s disciples had gathered in Sion, * as He said, * then did the 
Spirit come down upon them, * as was promised. * Appearing as fire, showing 
the apostles to be teachers, * who spoke of the hidden things of the Trinity ** 
while breathing forth fire. 
The divine Spirit came upon the sacred apostles, * making of them heavenly 
swords. * Thus they consecrated all the earth unto God the Creator * as they 
cut down the impious ones. * By them the swords of the evil one have been 
destroyed, ** that our souls may be saved.  
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
We have seen the true Light; * we have received the heavenly Spirit; * we 
have found the true Faith, * we worship the indivisible Trinity; ** for He hath 
saved us.  
 “O joyous Light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my 
life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 
On the Aposticha, the following Stichera, in Tone IV: 
On this day the working of Thy Holy Spirit * came down upon Thine 
apostles, * showing them to be supremely wise, and seers of divine things, * 
filling them with Thy blessed teaching. * Wherefore, we glorify Thy saving 
dispensation, * O Jesus Almighty, ** the Savior of our souls. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
On this day Thy Spirit O all-powerful Lord, * hath been sent forth from the 
Father, * He Who is consubstantial with Thee, * was distributed among the 
apostles in the form of fiery tongues; * thus He prepared them to preach Thy 
mighty deeds. * Wherefore we glorify Thy saving dispensation, * O Jesus, 
Almighty, ** the Savior of our souls. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 
On this day, O Savior, * Thou hast poured forth the gifts of Thy 
Comforting Spirit, * granting mortal-mankind to prophesy, * as Thou didst 
once promise O Word, * whereby Thou didst teach all to worship and adore 
the undivided Trinity. * Wherefore we glorify Thy saving dispensation, * O 
Jesus Almighty, ** the Savior of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
O Lord, the descent of the Holy Spirit, * which enveloped Thine apostles, * 
made them to speak with other tongues. * Hence, the strange wonder was 
thought to be drunkenness by the unbelievers, * but to the believers it was a 
cause of salvation. * Wherefore, we beseech Thee to grant us also * His 
illumination, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both 
now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
WEDNESDAY IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the Great Litany:  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., of the Feast: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath.X) The following Sessional Hymn of 
the Feast, in Tone IV: 
The grace of the Spirit, * having descended upon Thine apostles, * who 
were humble fisherman, O Christ, * enlightened them with supreme wisdom 
and sovereignty: * For by their teachings we now celebrate the bright feast of 
Pentecost, ** hymning together with Thee and the Father, the divine Spirit. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XI) Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The all-holy Spirit, having now come down upon the blessed apostles * in 
the form of fire, * filled with astonishment all the nations assembled there. * 
For, O Lover of mankind, * as they spoke with fiery tongues, * everyone there 
present heard the speech in his native tongue. * While the miracle was taken to 
be drunkenness by the unbelieving, * it truly led those with faith to salvation. * 
For this cause we glorify Thy sovereignty O Christ God, * asking that the 
remission of our sins, ** be sent down in abundance upon Thy servants.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, 7 Troparia from the 2nd Canon of the 
Feast with its Irmos, to make eight, and four from the Menaion, to make twelve 
in each Ode. After the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn 
from the Menaion Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of Pentecost. 
After the Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of Pentecost. After the Ninth 
Ode, the Exapostilarion of Pentecost, Glory ..., Menaion, Both now ..., of 
Pentecost. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE I 
The second Canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of tongue 
proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the impurity 
from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is initiated 
into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-inspired 
songs. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The pure and revered mouth spake: From you there shall be no separation, 
O My friends! For, seated together upon the Father’s most high throne, I will 
pour out the Spirit, to enlighten them that desire abundant grace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having reached the end, the Word most true calmly perfecteth the heart; for 
having finished His work, Christ gladdened His friends, giving them the Spirit 
in a mighty wind with tongues of fire. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of tongue 
proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the impurity 
from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is initiated 
into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-inspired 
songs. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought a 
broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed the 
fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with children. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Incomprehensible is the supreme Godhead, for it hath shown the illiterate 
fishermen to be wise men who with their speech stopped the mouths of the 
sophists, and brought out of the deepest night countless peoples, through the 
brilliance of the Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
From unbegotten Light the all-effecting never-failing Brightness doth 
proceed, Who now shineth forth the radiance one in nature, of the Father’s 
power, through the Son, unto the nations in the fiery voice on Zion. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Katavasia: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought 
a broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed 
the fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with 
children. 
Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymns from the Menaion, then: 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
The ardent followers of the Savior were filled with joy, * and they who were 
fearful before obtained boldness, * for today the Holy Spirit descended from on 
high upon the house of the disciples, * and each one spake differently to the 
people; * for the tongues, in likeness as of fire, were dispersed, yet burned them 
not, ** but rather bedewed them. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Having by word thrown open the divine laver of regeneration, Thou, O 
Word of God, Compound Nature, dost bathe me with streams from Thine 
incorrupt, pierced side, sealing with the fervor of the Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
All things bow their knees unto the Comforter, and unto the Son of the 
Father, and unto the consubstantial Father, for in Three Hypostases they saw 
the true Being, inaccessible, timeless, and one; for the grace of the Spirit hath 
shone forth light. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Be ye perfected by the supreme Godhead, all ye ministers of the Thrice-
radiant Essence; for, beyond nature, Christ as Benefactor doth work perfection, 
making light shine unto salvation, providing all the grace of the Spirit. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto light, * 
receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a redeeming 
purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth from Zion, * 
even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
As He Himself was well-pleased, of His own accord the unsubordinated 
Spirit cometh forth from the Father, making wise with tongues the apostles, 
sealing with the impress of the life-bearing Word, being of One Might with the 
Father, and One Form, of Whom the Savior spake also. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
That He might heal the minds of sin, the All-ruling God and Word doth 
prepare for Himself as a spotless dwelling the apostles, in whom the light of the 
Spirit, One in might and essence with Him, doth now make Its abode. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto 
light, * receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a 
redeeming purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth 
from Zion, * even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Do Thou renew within us, that we may for ever possess the right Spirit that 
we long for, Who proceedeth from the Father always invisibly, consuming the 
stains of hated matter and cleansing the filth of our minds, O Ruler of all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
A long-desired dignity dost Thou establish for the apostles in Zion mindful 
of Thy coming, O Spirit: the profession of the Word Begotten of the Father, 
which swiftly exposed the cruel prattle of the heathens’ babbling. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
Ikos: Grant speedy and steadfast consolation unto Thy servants, O Jesus, 
when our spirits are become despondent. Depart not from our souls when they 
be in afflictions, nor be Thou afar from our minds when they be in tribulations, 
but do Thou ever go before us. Draw nigh unto us, draw nigh, O Thou Who art 
everywhere present; and even as Thou wast ever with Thine apostles, so also do 
Thou unite Thyself to them that long for Thee, O compassionate One, that, 
being one with Thee, we may praise and glorify Thine all-holy Spirit. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor the 
lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the Comforter * 
doth inspire us to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * equal in 
might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Not understanding the prophetic voice, but hearing the apostles speak in 
strange tongues, the foolish called it drunkenness caused by wine; whereas we 
the pious fittingly call out to Thee: O Renewer of all things, blessed art Thou! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The divinely-inspired seer of visions, Joel, thundered forth a divine saying, 
as if spoken by the Word of the supreme Godhead: They on whom I will pour 
out my Spirit, shall exclaim together: O Nature, splendid with the Triple 
Radiance, blessed art Thou! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
At the third hour grace was seen to be well distributed, that it might indicate 
the worship of Three Hypostases in a simplicity of authority, but now we see in 
that unity on this, the Lord’s day, the Son, the Father and the blessed Spirit! 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor 
the lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the 
Comforter * doth inspire us to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * 
equal in might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The Spirit coming down in likeness of the tongues of fire, doth impress 
upon the memory of the apostles the man-saving doctrine which Christ Who 
heard it from the Father, declared unto them. Creation, formerly alienated and 
now reconciled, doth praise Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Light self-radiant and the cause of light, being alone self-mastering, unto 
salvation hast Thou come filling the apostles, esteemed as the summit by Thy 
servants. O that Thou shouldest grant the Spirit in great abundance! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The Spirit-sated mouth of the prophets sang of Thy sojourning in the flesh, 
O Sovereign; and the Spirit, brought forth from the Father’s bosom, Uncreated, 
Co-Creator and Co-enthroned with Thee, is revered by those who believe in a 
singular incarnation. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Katavasia: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
 (No Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and of mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
It is proper to hymn the maiden who giveth life; for she alone carried in her 
womb the Word that came to heal the diseased nature of man; and Who seated 
now on the right hand of the father, hath sent down the grace of the Spirit. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Let all of us, on whom the divinely-poured grace hath breathed, shining, 
flashing, changed with a strange and most magnificent transformation, having 
come to know the Essence equal in might, indivisible, and wise, and thrice 
radiant, render glory. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and of mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
O Thou all-holy Spirit, * Who from the Father dost proceed, * and through 
the Son hast descended * on the unlettered disciples: * Do Thou now sanctify 
and save ** all that acknowledge Thee as God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (From the Menaion, if any) Both now ..., 
The Father is Light; the Word is Light; * and the Holy Spirit is Light, * Who 
was sent to the apostles * in the form of fiery tongues; * and thus through Him 
all creation ** is illumined and guided to worship the Holy Trinity 
On the Praises, The usual Psalm, if there are Stichera for Praises from 
the Menaion they are included. After the chanting of Praises: 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “O house of Ephratha ...”: 
The Comforter hath descended * unto us from on high, * as it did in the 
beginning * unto the apostles, sanctifying and saving those ** who confess 
Thee to be God. 
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
Suddenly, from the heavens, * the power of the divine * Comforter came 
upon all * the apostles, showing them to be ** all-wise Theologians. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 
Enlightened by the rays of the * divine primordial Mind, * the disciples * of 
the Word, substantively partook ** of the Holy Spirit. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Heavenly King, * Comforter, Spirit of Truth, * Who art everywhere present 
and fillest all things, * Treasury of good gifts * and Giver of life: * come and 
abide in us, * and cleanse us of all impurity, ** and save our souls, O good One. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both 
now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the Father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
WEDNESDAY OF THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE IV of both Canons. 
He that formerly spake through the prophets, and was foretold in the law 
unto the imperfect, the Comforter, the true God, doth become known today 
unto the ministers and witnesses of the Word. (Twice) 
Bearing the sign of Divinity, the Spirit was distributed in fire upon the 
apostles, and was manifested in strange tongues, for the divine Power coming 
from the Father is absolute. 
Having by word thrown open the divine laver of regeneration, Thou, O 
Word of God, Compound Nature, dost bathe me with streams from Thine 
incorrupt, pierced side, sealing with the fervor of the Spirit. 
Glory ..., All things bow their knees unto the Comforter, and unto the Son 
of the Father, and unto the consubstantial Father, for in Three Hypostases they 
saw the true Being, inaccessible, timeless, and one; for the grace of the Spirit 
hath shone forth light. 
Both now ..., Be ye perfected by the supreme Godhead, all ye ministers of 
the Thrice-radiant Essence; for, beyond nature, Christ as Benefactor doth work 
perfection, making light shine unto salvation, providing all the grace of the 
Spirit. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. **O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory ..., (for the 
Saint, if there be any). Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VIII: 
The Prokeimenon: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the works of His hands. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: (1:18 - 27) 
Brethren: The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness 
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness; Because 
that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it 
unto them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are 
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal 
power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: Because that, when they 
knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became 
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing 
themselves to be wise, they became fools, And changed the glory of the 
uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, 
and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them up 
to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own 
bodies between themselves: Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and 
worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for 
ever. Amen. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even 
their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: And 
likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust 
one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and 
receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet. 
Alleluia in Tone I: 
Verse: By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established, and all the 
might of them by the Spirit of His mouth. 
Verse: The Lord looked down from heaven, He beheld all the sons of 
men. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (5:20 - 26) 
The Lord said: Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of 
the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
Ye have heard that it was said of them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and 
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, That 
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the 
judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of 
the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. 
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy 
brother hath ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy 

--- PAGE 14 ---
way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Agree 
with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any 
time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the 
officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no 
means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of 
the Second Canon of the feast:  
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
 
The Communion Hymn: Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of 
uprightness. Alleluia. 
 
