--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning. The 12th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 from the Pentecostarion, in Tone I: 
Behold this is the day of joy and rejoicing, * for today from on high the 
Holy Spirit hath appeared unto the sacred apostles, * coming from the Father in 
the form of fire, and enlightening all: * The fisherman have became orators of 
Wisdom, * as Luke the divine Trumpet wrote, * all things have been filled with 
the Spirit. * Wherefore with faith we stand amazed, * offering praise unto the 
abundance of mercy and self-emptying ** of Christ our God. 
Let us celebrate the solemn festival of Holy Pentecost, * and the power of 
the Spirit, * and the truly joyous consummation of our divine hope, * for the 
mystery from all ages hath been revealed unto us, * wherefore we cry aloud 
unto Thee: * O Creator of all things, take not Thy Holy Spirit from us O Word, 
* rather send it down from the heavens O Savior, * by the prayers of the Saints, 
and of Thine all-famed and glorious apostles, ** we beseech Thee to grant 
peace unto our souls. 
Today heaven doth declare the vivifying power of the Savior, * and the 
might of the divine Comforter, * which hath clearly been preached throughout 
all the world, * enlightening all of creation with its teachings, * of the Unity of 
the undivided Trinity, * in three uncommingled Hypostases. * Wherefore let us 
celebrate in faith the coming of the Holy Spirit, * which hath appeared from on 
high, ** enlightening the ends of the earth. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
The Comforter, having come from the Father * through Christ God, * hath 
come unto us on earth today, ** therefore with faith we worship the Holy 
Spirit.  
 “O joyous Light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Then, “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,” 
The Litany: Let us complete our evening ..., 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, the following Stichera, in Tone I: 
The Holy Spirit, * proceeding from the Father, and glorified in the Son, * 
Which doth support and rule over all that is, * maintaining life, and by Which 
we live and are saved, * Thee do we bless: ** O unfailing Comforter, grant 
peace to Thy world. 
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
The Holy Spirit, * the wellspring of every good thing, * hath come unto all 
the ends of the earth, * in its essential noetic power, * filling the apostles with 
joy, and divine virtue. * Wherefore we cry aloud, ** O ineffable Comforter, 
grant peace to Thy world. 
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 
The Holy Spirit is God, * equal in sovereignty and co-enthroned with the 
Father, * and manifest through the Son, * most supremely pure light shining 
forth from the Light, * of the beginningless perfect Father, * and proceeding 
from the Son. * Unto Him do we cry aloud: ** O Life-giving Comforter, grant 
peace to Thy world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
When Thou didst send down Thy Spirit, O Lord, * while the apostles were 
seated, * the children of the Jews beheld and were astonished with amazement; 
* for they heard them speaking in other, foreign tongues, * according as the 
Spirit bestowed on them; * for though they were unlearned, they were made 
wise; * and in catching and bringing the nations to the Faith, * they preached of 
things divine. * Wherefore, we also cry to Thee: * O Thou Who wast seen on 
earth and didst save us from error, ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Then “Now lettest Thy servant ...,” Trisagion ..., “Our Father ...,” Then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both 
now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest/Deacon: Wisdom 
Choir: (Master) Bless. 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
THURSDAY IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Choir: Amen. 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms. 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (to the Saint, if any) Both now ..., of the Feast: 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIII) The following Sessional Hymn 
of the Feast, in Tone I: 
Behold, the prophets’ prophesies have been fulfilled. * For He Who by 
veiled beams hath revealed * things that would come to pass, * since He is God 
the Comforter, * hath abundantly poured Himself forth upon the apostles. * 
And through them unto us the faithful ** who worship the uncreated Trinity. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XIV) Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
The ardent followers of the Savior were filled with joy, * and they who were 
fearful before obtained boldness, * for today the Holy Spirit descended from on 
high upon the house of the disciples, * and each one spake differently to the 
people; * for the tongues, in likeness as of fire, were dispersed, and burned 
them not, ** but rather bedewed them. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then the 50th Psalm. For the Canons, 7 Troparia from the 1st Canon with 
its Irmos, to make eight, and 4 from the Menaion, to make 12 in each Ode. 
After the third Ode, the Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymn from the 
Menaion Glory ..., Both now ..., the Sessional Hymn of Pentecost. After the 
Sixth Ode, the Kontakion and Ikos of Pentecost. After the Ninth Ode, the 
Exapostilarion of Pentecost, Glory ..., Menaion, Both now ..., of Pentecost. 
The Canon, by Cosmos the Monk, in Tone VII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: He Who quencheth wars with a lofty arm * hath covered over 
Pharaoh and his chariots in the sea. * Let us sing unto Him, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
As of old Thou didst promise the disciples, O Christ Who didst send the 
Spirit Comforter, Thou didst indeed shine forth light upon the world, O Thou 
Who lovest mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
That which of old was preached by the Law and the prophets hath been 
fulfilled; for today the grace of the divine Spirit hath been poured out upon all 
the faithful. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Covered by the divine cloud, * he that was slow of tongue 
proclaimed the Law written by God; * for having shaken off the impurity 
from the eye of his mind, * He beholdeth Him That is, and he is initiated 
into the knowledge of the Spirit, * While giving praise with God-inspired 
songs. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou didst say unto Thy disciples, O Christ: * Tarry ye in 
Jerusalem * till ye be clothed with power from on high, * and I will send 
you another Comforter like unto Me, * Who is My Spirit and the Spirit of 
the Father, * in Whom ye shall be established. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The power of the divine Spirit coming down divinely joined together into 
one, the divided tongues of those who of old had come to a wicked agreement, 
thereby imparting unto the faithful the knowledge of the Trinity, in which we 
are established. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Only the prayer of the prophetess Anna, * who of old brought 
a broken spirit * unto the mighty One and God of knowledge, * loosed 
the fetters of a childless womb * and the unruly rebuke of her with 
children. 
Kontakion, Ikos, and Sessional Hymns from the Menaion, then: 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
The ardent followers of the Savior were filled with joy, * and they who were 
fearful before obtained boldness, * for today the Holy Spirit descended from on 
high upon the house of the disciples, * and each one spake differently to the 
people; * for the tongues, in likeness as of fire, were dispersed, yet burned them 
not, ** but rather bedewed them. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 
ODE IV 
Irmos: When the prophet perceived Thy coming in the last days, O 
Christ, * he cried out: I have heard of Thy might, O Lord, * that Thou 
hast come to save all Thine anointed ones. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
He that formerly spake through the prophets, and was foretold in the law 
unto the imperfect, the Comforter, the true God, doth become known today 
unto the ministers and witnesses of the Word. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Bearing the sign of Divinity, the Spirit was distributed in fire upon the 
apostles, and was manifested in strange tongues, for the divine Power coming 
from the Father is absolute. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: O King of kings, even Thou Who art from the Only One, * O 
Word, Who comest forth from the only uncaused Father, * Thou, as our 
Benefactor, didst unfailingly send * Thy Spirit, Equal in might, unto the 
apostles, who sing: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord.  
ODE V 
Irmos: The Spirit of salvation, O Lord, * Who was conceived in the loins 
of the prophets because of their fear of Thee * and was brought forth 
upon the earth, * doth purify the hearts of the apostles, * and is renewed 
in an upright manner in the faithful; * for Thy commandments are light 
and peace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
This power that came down today is the Good Spirit, the Spirit of the 
wisdom of God, the Spirit that proceedeth from the Father, and through the 
Son hath appeared unto us the faithful, presented in the holiness of His nature, 
unto those in whom He dwelleth, and in whom He is seen. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: O ye children of the Church, * whose likeness is like unto 
light, * receive ye the fire-breathing dew of the Spirit, * which is a 
redeeming purification of offenses; * for now hath the Law gone forth 
from Zion, * even the Spirit’s grace, in the form of tongues of fire. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship 
I have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the 
deadly abyss.. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Of Thy Spirit hast Thou abundantly poured out upon all flesh, according as 
Thou hast said, O Lord, and all things are filled with Thy knowledge, for Thou, 
the Son didst come forth from the Father immutably, and the Spirit indivisibly 
proceedeth. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Thou hast shone forth from the Virgin * as forgiveness and 
salvation for us, O Christ Master; * that, like as Jonah was rift from the 
belly of the sea monster, * Thou mightest snatch from corruption * all 
the fallen race of Adam. 
Kontakion and Ikos of the Feast, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
Ikos: Grant speedy and steadfast consolation unto Thy servants, O Jesus, 
when our spirits are become despondent. Depart not from our souls when they 
be in afflictions, nor be Thou afar from our minds when they be in tribulations, 
but do Thou ever go before us. Draw nigh unto us, draw nigh, O Thou Who art 
everywhere present; and even as Thou wast ever with Thine apostles, so also do 
Thou unite Thyself to them that long for Thee, O compassionate One, that, 
being one with Thee, we may praise and glorify Thine all-holy Spirit. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed 
the fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O 
Lord, the God of our fathers!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
While the apostles proclaimed the great divine things, the unbelievers 
considered as drunkenness the working of the Spirit, through Whom the Trinity 
becometh known, the one God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The indivisible Nature do we theologize in Orthodox manner: God the 
beginningless Father, the Word and Spirit of the same authority, and we cry: O 
God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: The harmonious music of the flutes sounded forth * to honor 
the lifeless idol made of gold; * but the light bearing grace of the 
Comforter * doth inspire us to cry out in reverence: * Trinity in Unity, * 
equal in might and beginningless, * Blessed art Thou!  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow 
of speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for 
God showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be 
unvanquished by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
When the quickening mighty breath of the all-holy Spirit came down from 
on high upon the fishermen in the form of tongues of fire, they proclaimed the 
greatness of God: All ye works, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Without dreading the fearful fire and like those treading up the untouchable 
mountain, come, let us stand upon Mount Zion, in the city of the living God, 
singing in choir together with the Spirit-bearing apostles: All ye works, praise ye 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: The type of the Godhead prefigured in the resplendent three * 
loosed the bonds and moistened the flames with dew. * The children 
praise, and all creation that was made doth bless, * the only Savior and 
Creator of all, * as their Benefactor. 
(No Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh 
to the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, 
* thee do we magnify. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Borne in gladness upon a chariot of flaming fire, the fire-breathing zealot of 
old typified that radiant breath which now shone forth from above upon the 
apostles, and these, illumined, made known the Trinity to all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Strange things were heard from the disciples, not in accordance with the law 
of their nature, for while only one voice spake, by the grace of the Spirit various 
peoples, tribes, and nations heard the great things of God, learning the 
knowledge of the Trinity. 
And 4 Troparia from the canon from the Menaion. 
Katavasia: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and of mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
O Thou all-holy Spirit, * Who from the Father dost proceed, * and through 
the Son hast descended * on the unlettered disciples: * Do Thou now sanctify 
and save ** all that acknowledge Thee as God. (Twice) 
Glory ..., (From the Menaion, if any) Both now ..., 
The Father is Light; the Word is Light; * and the Holy Spirit is Light, * Who 
was sent to the apostles * in the form of fiery tongues; * and thus through Him 
all creation ** is illumined and guided to worship the Holy Trinity 
On the Praises, The usual Psalm, if there are Stichera for Praises from 
the Menaion they are included. After the chanting of Praises: 
Reader: To Thee is due glory ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the Light. 
The Small Doxology (read) 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
The all-holy Spirit, * one in essence with the Father and the Word, * having 
come unto the apostles, * making itself into flames of fire, ** hath enlightened 
them with Grace divine. 
Verse: Create in me a clean heart, O God, * and renew a right spirit 
within me. 
Do Thou O God * make the all-holy Spirit abide in us, * as Thou didst once 
send Him unto Thine apostles, * O compassionate One, * strengthening 
thereby the fulfillment, ** of Thy saving dispensation in the world. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Verse: Cast me not away from Thy presence, * and take not Thy Holy 
Spirit from me. 
The Comforter, who of old * was spoken of in the prophesies, * hath now 
been manifest from heaven, * spreading forth the glory of God, * by the sacred 
apostles, ** by whom may we be granted forgiveness and great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
In Thy courts, O Lord, as we the faithful * bend the knee of the soul and 
the body, * we praise Thee, the beginningless Father, * the co-beginningless 
Son, * and the co-eternal and Most holy Spirit, ** Who dost enlighten and 
sanctify our souls. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., then: 
The Dismissal Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, * and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. ** O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Note: If the Menaion hath a Troparion, we chant as follows: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., Glory ..., from the Menaion, Both 
now ..., Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God ..., 
 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
 
 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He Who is blessed ..., 
Choir: Amen, Establish, O God, the holy Orthodox Faith ..., 
Priest: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the cherubim ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee O Christ God, our hope ...,  
Choir: Glory to the Father ..., 
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who sent down from heaven the Most 
Holy Spirit in the form of tongues of fire upon His holy disciples and 
apostles ..., 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
THURSDAY OF THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 6 verses from ODE V of both Canons. 
This power that came down today is the Good Spirit, the Spirit of the 
wisdom of God, the Spirit that proceedeth from the Father, and through the 
Son hath appeared unto us the faithful, presented in the holiness of His nature, 
unto those in whom He dwelleth, and in whom He is seen. (Twice) 
As He Himself was well-pleased, of His own accord the unsubordinated 
Spirit cometh forth from the Father, making wise with tongues the apostles, 
sealing with the impress of the life-bearing Word, being of One Might with the 
Father, and One Form, of Whom the Savior spake also. (Twice) 
Glory ..., That He might heal the minds of sin, the All-ruling God and Word 
doth prepare for Himself as a spotless dwelling the apostles, in whom the light 
of the Spirit, One in might and essence with Him, doth now make Its abode. 
Both now ..., That He might heal the minds of sin, the All-ruling God and 
Word doth prepare for Himself as a spotless dwelling the apostles, in whom the 
light of the Spirit, One in might and essence with Him, doth now make Its 
abode. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion for the Feast Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. **O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Then the Troparion for the Temple, the Troparion for the Saint of the 
day, if there be any, then the Kontakion for Temple, Glory ..., (for the 
Saint, if there be any). Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VIII: 
The Prokeimenon: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the works of His hands. 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: (1:28 - 2:9) 
Brethren: There are those who did not like to retain God in their 
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which 
are not convenient; Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, 
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, 
malignity; whisperers, Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, 
inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, Without understanding, 
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: Who 
knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy 
of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. 
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for 
wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest 
doest the same things. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to 
truth against them which commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, 
that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt 
escape the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and 
forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth 
thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up 
unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous 
judgment of God; Who will render to every man according to his deeds: To 
them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and 
immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey 
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, Tribulation and 
anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the 
Gentile; 
Alleluia, in Tone I: 
Verse: By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established, and all the 
might of them by the Spirit of His mouth. 
Verse: The Lord looked down from heaven, He beheld all the sons of 
men. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (5:27 - 32) 
The Lord said: Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a 
woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. 
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy 

--- PAGE 13 ---
whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it 
off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members 
should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. It hath been 
said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of 
divorcement: But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving 
for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever 
shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery. 
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of 
the Second Canon of the feast:  
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
 
The Communion Hymn: Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of 
uprightness. Alleluia. 
 
 
