--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
SATURDAY MORNING IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
On the apodosis of the Feast of Pentecost, except for the Readings, the 
Polyeleas, and the Antiphons, we chant everything as set forth on the 
Feast of the Pentecost in Vespers, Matins, and the Liturgy. In place of 
the Antiphons we chant the Beatitudes with 6 Troparia from ODE IX of 
the Festal Canon. 
 
SATURDAY IN THE EIGHTH WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
The Typica, For the Beatitudes, 8 verses from ODE IX from both Canons. 
Borne in gladness upon a chariot of flaming fire, the fire-breathing zealot of 
old typified that radiant breath which now shone forth from above upon the 
apostles, and these, illumined, made known the Trinity to all. (Twice) 
Strange things were heard from the disciples, not in accordance with the law 
of their nature, for while only one voice spake, by the grace of the Spirit various 
peoples, tribes, and nations heard the great things of God, learning the 
knowledge of the Trinity.  
It is proper to hymn the maiden who giveth life; for she alone carried in her 
womb the Word that came to heal the diseased nature of man; and Who seated 
now on the right hand of the father, hath sent down the grace of the Spirit. 
(Twice) 
Let all of us, on whom the divinely-poured grace hath breathed, shining, 
flashing, changed with a strange and most magnificent transformation, having 
come to know the Essence equal in might, indivisible, and wise, and thrice 
radiant, render glory.  
At the Entrance, the Troparion of the Feast Tone VIII: 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, * Who hast shown forth the fishermen 
as supremely wise, * by sending down upon them the Holy Spirit, *and through 
them didst draw the world into Thy net. **O Lover of mankind, glory be to 
Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
Once, when He descended and confounded the tongues, * the Most High 
divided the nations; * and when He divided the tongues of fire, * He called all 
men into unity; ** and with one accord we glorify the all-holy Spirit. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VIII: 
The Prokeimenon: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * their 
words unto the ends of the world. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the works of His hands. 
 
THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS: (1:7 - 12) 
Brethren: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ. First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is 
spoken of throughout the whole world. For God is my witness, whom I serve 
with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of 
you always in my prayers; Making request, if by any means now at length I 
might have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you. For I 
long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye 
may be established; That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the 
mutual faith both of you and me. 
Alleluia in Tone II: 
Verse: By the Word of the Lord were the heavens established, and all the 
might of them by the Spirit of His mouth. 
Verse: The Lord looked down from heaven, He beheld all the sons of 
men. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (5:42 - 48) 
The Lord said: Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would 
borrow of thee turn not thou away. Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your 
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for 
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the 
children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the 
evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye 
love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the 
same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not 
even the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in 
heaven is perfect. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
Instead of “It is truly meet ...,” we chant the Irmos of the 9th ODE of 
the Second Canon of the feast:  
Irmos: Rejoice, O Queen boast of virgins and mothers; * for every 
eloquent and capable mouth is unable to extol thee worthily, * and every 
mind is confounded in seeking to comprehend thy childbirth. * 
Wherefore, with one accord thee do we glorify.  
 
The Communion Hymn: Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the land of 
uprightness. Alleluia. 
 
 
 
