--- PAGE 1 ---
FIRST SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST, OF ALL SAINTS  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera, 6 from the Oktoechos, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
We offer unto Thee, O Christ, * an evening hymn and spiritual worship; * because 
Thou wast well-pleased to have mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward me. 
O Lord, cast us not away * from Thy presence; * but be well-pleased to have 
mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear my 
voice. 
Rejoice holy Zion, * Mother of the Churches, * dwelling-place of God; * for it 
was thee who first received forgiveness of sins ** through the Resurrection. 
Other Stichera, by Anatolius: 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
The Word, begotten of God the Father before all ages, * hath in the last times 
become incarnate of her who knew not wedlock, * and willingly endured the 
crucifixion and death, * and mankind, slain of old, hath thereby been saved ** 
through His own Resurrection. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall stand? * 
For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
We glorify Thy Resurrection from the dead, O Christ, * through which Thou hast 
freed the race of Adam from the tyranny of Hades, * and as God hast granted the 
world eternal life ** and great mercy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my soul 
hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Glory be to Thee, O Christ Savior, * only-begotten Son of God, * affixed by nails 
to the cross and risen from the tomb ** on the third day. 
And 4 Stichera of All Saints, in Tone VI: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
The Spirit-proclaiming Disciples of the Savior, * having become, through faith, 
instruments of the Spirit, * and being scattered to the ends of the earth, * sowed the 
venerable proclamations of Orthodoxy: * From their divine husbandry hath 
blossomed forth, * an army of martyrs by grace, * who inscribed the signs of their 
passion, * by sundry kinds of tortures, scourging and fire. ** and with boldness they 
pray on behalf of our souls.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Enflamed by the love of the Lord, * despising fire; * the venerable martyrs in 
Christ were consumed like divine coals, * drying up the grass of the arrogance of 
falsehood: * They bridled the mouths of beasts * by their venerable supplications; * 
and, being beheaded, * They thereby beheaded all the hosts of the enemy, * and 
having patiently shed their blood, ** they watered the Church with illumining faith.  
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Having wrestled with beasts, * and been struck with swords, * their arms and 
limbs torn apart, * the heroic martyrs were tormented, * consumed by material fire, * 
dismembered and pierced with lances. * Enduring all this with firm patience, * 
foreseeing their approaching end, * the crowns of incorruption, and the glory of 
Christ, ** Whom, they implore with boldness on behalf of our souls.  
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of the 
Lord abideth forever. 
Let us praise with sacred hymns * those who faithfully suffered throughout all the 
ends of the earth, * the apostles, martyrs, Godly-minded Priests, and noble women, * 
for being earthly, they united with those of heaven; * and by their passion attained 
passionlessness by the grace of Christ. * And now as luminaries they illumine us ** 
and with boldness, pray on behalf of our souls.  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: Ye are the pillars of the Church * and the fulfillment of the 
Gospel, * O divine ranks of martyrs. * In deeds ye have fulfilled the sayings of the 
Savior; * for through you the gates of Hades, which had been opened against the 
Church, have been closed; * and the blood you shed hath dried up the oblation of 
idols. * And having nourished the perfection of believers through your slaughter, * ye 
astonished the bodiless ones, * standing before Christ wearing your crowns. ** 
Wherefore, intercede ye ceaselessly with Him on behalf of our souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth forth 
from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold in nature 
but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect God and perfect 
man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** 
that our souls find mercy!  
After the Entrance, “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
The Three Scriptural Lessons. 
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (43:9-14)  
Thus saith the Lord: Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be 
assembled: who among them can declare this, and show us former things? Let them 
bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is 
truth. Ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, and My servant whom I have chosen: that 
ye may know and believe Me, and understand that I am He: before Me there was no 
God formed, neither shall there be after Me. I, even I, am the Lord; and beside Me 
there is no Savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shown, when there was 
no strange god among you: therefore ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am 
God. Yea, before the day was I am He; and there is none that can deliver out of My 
hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Thus saith the Lord, your Redeemer, the Holy 
One of Israel.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON (3:1-9)  
But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment 
touch them. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die: And their departure is 
taken for misery, and their going from us to be utter destruction: But they are in 
peace. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of 
immortality. And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded: For 
God proved them, and found them worthy for Himself. As gold in the furnace hath 
He tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. And in the time of their 
visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. They 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign 
forever. They that put their trust in Him shall understand the truth: And such as be 
faithful in love shall abide with Him: For grace and mercy is to His saints, and He 
hath care for his elect.  
A READING FROM THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON:  
The righteous live for evermore; their reward also is with the Lord, and the care 
of them is with the Most High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a 
beautiful crown from the Lord’s hand: for with His right hand shall He cover them, 
and with His arm shall He protect them. He shall take to Him His jealousy for 
complete armor, and make the creature His weapon for the revenge of His enemies. 
He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and true judgment instead of a helmet. 
He shall take holiness for an invincible shield. His severe wrath shall He sharpen for a 
sword, and the world shall fight with Him against the unwise. Then shall the right-
aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow, shall 
they fly to the mark. And hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, 

--- PAGE 4 ---
and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and the floods shall cruelly drown 
them. Yea, a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and like a storm shall blow 
them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall 
overthrow the thrones of the mighty. Hear, therefore, O ye kings, and understand; 
learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, ye that rule the people, and 
glory in the multitude of nations. For power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty 
from the Most High.  
At the Litiya, the Sticheron of the temple, 
And these Stichera to the saints, in Tone I: 
In unison of faith, * let us spiritually celebrate the universal festival * of all those 
who have been pleasing unto God from all ages, * the venerable order of Patriarchs, 
the assembly of prophets, the adornment of apostles, * the gathering of martyrs, the 
boast of Ascetics, * the memory of all the Saints; * for they intercede unceasingly ** 
that peace be granted to the world, and great mercy to our souls.  
Come, all ye faithful, * with psalms and hymns and spiritual odes, * let us acclaim 
the all-glorious memory of all the Saints: * the Baptist of the Savior, the apostles, 
prophets, and martyrs, * the hierarchs, teachers, and righteous, * the ascetics and the 
just, * and the God-loving company of holy women; * and let us cry out with one 
accord while we reverently acclaim them as blessed: * O supremely good Christ our 
God, * by their intercessions grant peace unto Thy churches, * victory over heresy 
unto Thy Christ-loving hierarchs, ** and great mercy to our souls.  
Come, let us all rejoice spiritually with the memory of the Saints; * for behold, it 
hath come bringing us bountiful gifts. * Wherefore, let us cry out with a voice of 
rejoicing * and with a pure conscience, saying: * Rejoice, O assembly of prophets, 
who proclaimed the coming of Christ to the world, * and who foresaw things afar off 
as though they were near. * Rejoice, O choir of the apostles, ye fishers of men * who 
caught the nations in your nets. * Rejoice, O company of the martyrs, * who were 
gathered from the ends of the earth into one Faith, * and who for its sake endured 
the infliction of torments, * and in a perfect manner received the crown of contest. * 
Rejoice, O beehive of the Fathers, * who wore down your own bodies in asceticism, * 
and mortified the passions of the flesh; * who by divine love took wing in mind and 
soared unto the heavens, * and who rejoice with the angels and enjoy eternal good 
things. * Wherefore, O ye prophets, apostles, and martyrs, * together with the 
ascetics, fervently beseech Him Who hath crowned you, * that He redeem from 
visible and invisible enemies ** those who with faith and love celebrate your ever-
venerable memory.  
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., in Tone V:  
Let us hasten unto the present festival, O ye faithful; * for there is set before us a 
spiritual banquet and a mystical wine-bowl, * filled with the sweet food of joy, * even 
the virtues of the martyrs. * For these stout-hearted ones, from the ends of the earth, 
* offered unto God as a rational sacrifice * the varied torments and afflictions of their 
bodily members * and the very prime of their years. * Some were beheaded, others 
were dismembered of their arms * and were sundered in every joint. * All the Saints 
became sharers of the Passion of Christ. * O Lord, Who didst grant them crowns as a 
reward for their afflictions, ** grant that we may live according to their example, since 
Thou lovest mankind.  
 Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O most 
honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is the Sun of 
righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in darkness, * deigning 
to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image by His own hand. * 
Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a mother’s boldness before 
Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be saved. 
On the Aposticha, the Stichera of the Resurrection, in Tone VIII: 
O Christ, having descended from heaven, * Thou didst ascend the Cross; * O 
immortal Life, Thou didst descend into Hades; * the true Light, unto those in 
darkness; * the Resurrection unto all to those who had fallen. ** Our illumination and 
our Savior, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Let us glorify Christ who didst rise from the dead: * for having taken a body and a 
soul, * He parted them one from another by the passion. * For His soul didst descend 
into Hades, * which He despoiled, while the holy body of the Redeemer of our souls 
** knew not corruption in the tomb. 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
O Christ, in psalms and hymns we glorify Thy Resurrection from the dead. * For 
through it Thou hast freed us from the tyranny of Hades, ** and as God Thou hast 
granted us life eternal, ** and Thy great mercy. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days. 
Thou, O Master of all things, * art the incomprehensible Creator of heaven and 
earth, * by suffering the Cross Thou hast become for me the source of immortality. * 
Submitting to burial and arising in glory, * Thou hast raised Adam with Thyself by 
Thine All-powerful hand. * Glory to Thine arising on the third day, * through which 
Thou hast granted us eternal life and the forgiveness of sins, ** as Thou alone art 
lovingly compassionate. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Come, ye believers, * let us today stand in rank and celebrate with true worship; * 
let us exalt with glorifications the memorial of the all-honored, all-revered saints, * 
shouting, Rejoice, O glorious apostles, prophets, martyrs and Bishops! * Rejoice, O 
company of the righteous and just! * Rejoice, O rank of honored women! * Entreat 
Christ to grant the orthodox victory over the godless, ** and our souls Great Mercy.  
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, O 
all-pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from the primal 
curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, * O most pure 
one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O Sovereign Lady, ** 
the intercession, protection and salvation of our souls! 
“Now Lettest Thou thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then: 
Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos (Twice)  
Troparion for the Saints in Tone IV  
Adorned in the blood of Thy martyrs * throughout all the world as in purple and 
fine linen, * Thy church, through them, doth cry unto Thee, O Christ God: * Send 
down Thy compassions upon Thy people; ** grant peace to Thy commonwealth, and 
great mercy to our souls. (Once) 
Blessing of the loaves.  
Blessed be the Name of the Lord ..., and the rest. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
AT MATINS:  
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
From on high didst Thou descend, O compassionate One; * to burial of three 
days hast Thou submitted * that Thou mightest free us from our passions. ** O our 
Life and Resurrection, O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Troparion for the Saints, in Tone IV:  
Adorned in the blood of Thy martyrs * throughout all the world as in purple and 
fine linen, * Thy church, through them, doth cry unto Thee, O Christ God: * Send 
down Thy compassions upon Thy people; ** grant peace to Thy commonwealth, and 
great mercy to our souls.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * hath 
been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate in an 
uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * and through 
it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. II), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VIII: 
Thou the Life of all, * didst rise from the dead, * and an angel of light cried out to 
the women saying: * “Cease your tears. Bring the good tidings unto the apostles’. * 
Cry aloud in hymns that Christ the Lord hath arisen ** who as God was well-pleased 
to save mankind. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
When Thou wast indeed risen from the tomb * Thou didst command the holy 
women to announce the Resurrection to the apostles, * as it is written; * and Peter, 
having arrived quickly, * stood by the grave and seeing the light in the tomb was 
affrightened. * observing the grave clothes lying therein, * without the divine body, * 
and believing he cried aloud: * “Glory be to Thee O Christ God our Savior, ** Who 
hast saved us all, ** for Thou art the effulgence of the Father.” 
Glory ..., Both now. Theotokion: 
O good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the Resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth Thy 
love for mankind, O merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the Theotokos who 
bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. III), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Pentecostarion, in Tone VIII: 
Arrayed in white and bright like lightning, * Gabriel came unto the sepulcher of 
Christ God * and rolled away the stone from the tomb, * and loosed the seal from the 
stone. * The soldiers, seized with fear, became as dead men, * and forsook the tomb, 
* O ye lawless ones, be ye now put to shame, ** and know that Christ hath arisen. 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all Thy 
wonders. 
In truth, having arisen from the tomb, * Thou didst send forth the righteous 
women * to preach unto the apostles that Thou hadst arisen * as saith the scripture. * 
Peter then ran with haste and arrived at the sepulcher, * and on seeing the light in the 
tomb, he was struck with awe. * Wherefore seeing the linen clothes lying alone, * and 
Thy divine body not laying there, * in fear he cried aloud: * Glory be to Thee O 
Christ God, for Thou art the Savior of us all, ** Thou art the effulgence of the 
Father. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
In Thee, O Full of grace, * doth all creation rejoice, * the ranks of angels and the 
race of mankind; * O all-hallowed temple and spiritual paradise, * boast of Virgins. * 
For from thee God became incarnate * and He who is our God before the ages 
became a child. * He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it wider than the 
heavens. * In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; ** glory be to thee. 
If the Temple is dedicated to All-Saints the Polyeleos is chanted, After which: 
The Megalynarion: We magnify you, O ye apostles, martyrs, prophets, and all 
Saints, and honor your holy memory, for ye pray for us to Christ our God. 
Verse: Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in His commandments shall 
he greatly delight. 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead, * O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself raising up 
Adam, ** and freeing all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus the 
radiant angel within the tomb * addressed the myrrh-bearing women; * behold the 
tomb and understand, ** for the Savior is risen from the tomb. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, * 
but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, weep 
not, ** but tell of the Resurrection to the apostles. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, bewailing, 
* but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living among the dead, 
* for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy Trinity, 
* one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, Amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O Virgin, 
* and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from life * have 
thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the little Litany: and: 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The myrrh-bearing women standing at the tomb of the Giver of life * seeking the 
immortal Master among the dead; * and having received the glad tidings of joy from 
the angel * announced unto the apostles that Christ the Lord is risen, ** granting the 
world great mercy. 
The Songs of Ascent in Tone VIII: the 1st Antiphon: 
From my youth the enemy tempteth me, * enflaming me with the desire for 
pleasures; ** but trusting in Thee O Lord, I put him to flight. 
Let those that hate Zion, * become like grass before it is tilled; ** for Christ will 
sever their necks with the sharp blade of torments. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit all things have life; * Light from Light, eminent God: ** we 
hymn Him together with the Father and the Word. 
2nd Antiphon: 
Let my humble heart be sheltered by the fear of Thee; * lest it fall away from Thee 
by being conceited, ** O exceedingly compassionate One. 
He who hath his hope in the Lord * will not be afraid when the Lord judgest all 
things ** with fire and torment. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Everyone inspired by the Holy Spirit seeth all and foretelleth, * working the 
greatest wonders, * and singing of one God in three Hypostases; * for though the 
Divinity radiates with triune light, ** it ruleth as one. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
3rd Antiphon: 
I have cried unto Thee, O Lord, hearken unto me, * bend Thine ear to my 
supplications when I cry unto Thee, ** and do thou cleanse me before taking me 
from this life. 
Each and every one who returneth to mother earth * will depart to receive 
torments or rewards ** in reward for their life’s actions. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Contemplation of God by the Holy Spirit * is of a thrice-holy unity; * for the 
Father is beginningless, * from Whom the Son was begotten before time, * and the 
Spirit equal in essence and majesty, ** doth blaze forth equally from the Father. 
4th Antiphon: 
Behold, what is so good, what is so pleasant * as to see brothers dwelling 
together? ** For by this the Lord hath promised eternal life. 
The One who adorneth the lilies of the field * doth command us to be 
unconcerned ** over temporal things. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit, * by one single cause all things gain the reward of peace; * for 
He is God perfectly consubstantial ** with both the Father and the Son. 
Prokeimenon: in Tone VIII: : The Lord shall be King unto eternity; * thy God, 
O Zion, unto generation and generation. 
Verse: Praise the Lord, O my soul. I will praise the Lord in my life. 
Let every breath ...,  
The 1st Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then in Tone VI: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord Jesus, * 
the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath come to 
all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * for, having 
endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the multitude 
of our transgressions. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, ** 
and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” The Canons: 
The Canon of the Resurrection in Tone VIII, with four Troparia, The canon 
of the Cross & Resurrection, with two Troparia, the Canon of the Theotokos, 
with two Troparia, and the Canon of All-Saints with six Troparia: 
ODE I 
Resurrection Canon, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea in 
the figure of a cross, * once drowned pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * while 
it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a hymn 
unto God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
How can we not but marvel at Christ’s all-powerful divinity? To the faithful it 
poureth forth dispassion from his passion, while from His holy side, it sheddeth forth 
a fount of incorruption, and from His tomb, eternal life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
How glorious the angel doth now appear to the Women, wearing the luminous 
attributes of natural immaterial purity; for by his countenance he doth reveal the 
radiance of the Resurrection as he crieth aloud, “The Lord hath been raised!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Glorious things have been spoken of thee in generation after 
generation, O Virgin Theotokos, who, while remaining pure, didst contain within thy 
womb God the Word. Wherefore we all honor thee as our protection after God. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The gates the Hades of suffering have been destroyed, and its gatekeepers tremble 
in fear upon seeing in the lowest depths the One who on high supra-naturally 
surpasseth the nature of all things. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The ranks of angels stood amazed when they saw mankind’s fallen nature, which 
had been held fast in the lowest depths, now seated upon the throne of the Father. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Immaculate Mother of God, who hast given birth beyond nature to the incarnate 
and eternal Word, we sing thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Virgin hath given birth unto Thee, O Christ, the cluster of grapes from 
whence drippeth the life-bearing sweetness of the world’s salvation. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
While praising the ranks of Thy Saints, I ask that by their prayers I may be 
illumined in soul by Thy light; for Thou art the Unapproachable Light Who by Thy 
beams dost drive away the darkness of ignorance, O Christ, Thou Giver of Light and 
Word of God.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, Thou didst draw unto Thy knowledge 
the entire lot of the nations, O Master, and Thou didst illumine it with the light of the 
Holy Trinity through Thy holy apostles, through whom thou didst dispel error.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
Being obedient unto Thy law, O Christ, Thine apostles piously laid aside all the 
things of the earth; and these glorious ones made the whole world radiant with the 
light of grace while proclaiming Thee in an evangelical manner.  
Glory ..., Rejoicing, the martyrs took up Thy Cross and unwaveringly imitated 
Thine august Passion. These valiant ones feared neither the threat of the tyrants, nor 
fire, nor sword, nor stripes, nor hunger, nor death.  
 Both now ..., Manifestly acquiring a manly disposition, the virgins unwaveringly 
endured the contests of martyrdom, O all-pure one. Rejoicing in a godly wise manner, 
they were brought after thee unto thy Son, the King of all, as is written in the psalms.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping festival, * 
joyfully praising her wonders. 
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who in 
the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and didst 
establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save Thee, O only 
Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The salvific Passion of Thy flesh, O Christ, hath justified Adam, who had been 
condemned by the taste of sin; for Thou, who alone art without sin, hast revealed that 
Thou didst remain uncondemned by the trial of death. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Jesus my God, Thou hast made the light of the Resurrection to shine forth 
upon those that sit in the darkness and shadow of death, and by Thy divinity Thou 
hast bound the strong one and scattered his spoils. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be higher than the cherubim and seraphim, O 
Theotokos, for thou alone hast received within thy womb, O undefiled one, God 
who is uncircumscribable; and so with hymns we believers ever call thee blessed. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
When of old I disobeyed Thy commandments, O Lord Who hath fashioned me, 
Thou didst reckon me a stranger; however having refashioned me and taught me 
obedience, Thou hast reconciled me to Thyself through the Crucifixion. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
In Thy wisdom, foreknowing all things, O Lord, and by Thine understanding 
having established the nethermost depths, Thou in Thy condescension didst not 
disdain to raise him who was made in Thine image, O word of God. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Grant help unto me by thine intercessions, O all-pure one, by warding off the 
assaults of dreaded dangers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
When thou, O Theotokos, didst give birth to the prince of life on behalf of all the 
world, Thou didst become the restoration of our foremother Eve. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
The priests and shepherds were clothed with the sacred priesthood, which they 
wisely governed and worthily adorned, O Christ, for they were truly endowed with 
the word of teaching from above.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Made comely with the beauty of that primal creation of beauty, ye appeared as 
unerring luminaries and made the Church of Christ a heaven, O Saints, adorning it in 
diverse manners, each one in his own land.  
Glory ..., Being obedient unto Thy law and made radiant by diverse virtues, the 
assemblies of the blessed inherited the heavenly mansions rejoicing. For they all 
worthily performed the virtues, one accomplishing one, and another accomplishing 
another.  
 Both now ..., O Mother of God, for our sake and from a virginal womb thou 
didst give birth unto God the Word Who came forth from God, Whom the pure 
maidens long for in a God-befitting manner, manifestly following after thee unto 
Him.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory. 
Sessional Hymns of the Saints, in Tone VIII: 
Keeping feast on the holy memorial of the forefathers, * fathers, and patriarchs, 
apostles, and hierarchs, and martyrs, * prophets, and righteous ones, the ascetics, and 
just, O Christ God, * and of every name that is written in Thy Book of Life, * we 
beseech them all to make intercession, and we pray: * Grant Thy world peace through 
their prayers, O Lord, * in that Thou lovest mankind, * that we all may cry unto Thee: 
* O Christ God, Who art glorified in the counsel of Thy Saints, ** lo, Thou art He 
Who as is meet hast now truly glorified their memory.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Let us all praise the heavenly gate and ark, * the most holy mountain, the radiant 
cloud, the ladder to heaven’s heights, * that true spiritual paradise, the redemption of 
Eve, * the great treasure of all the world; * for through her was salvation enacted for 
all mankind, * and complete forgiveness and remission of ancient offences. * Thus, 
for this cause, let us all fervently cry aloud, and say unto her: * Do thou entreat thy 
Son and our God * that He grant forgiveness of transgressions to them ** that 
reverently worship thine all-holy Offspring.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art my 
God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom of Thy 
Father, hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the prophet Habbakuk I cry 
unto Thee, * “Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
While I was hostile towards Thee, Thou didst love me exceedingly, for by a 
wondrous self-emptying, Thou didst descend to earth, O compassionate Savior, not 
spurning the indignity of the coarseness of my state, yet remaining in the height of 
Thine ineffable glory, whereby Thou hast glorified me who had hitherto existed in 
dishonor. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Who now doth not stand in awe, O Master, upon seeing death destroyed through 
Thy suffering, corruption taking flight through Thy Cross, and Hades emptied of its 
wealth through Thy death? These actions result from Thy lofty power, O Thou 
Crucified Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou art the boast of the faithful, O Mother unwedded, thou art the 
protection, thou art the refuge of Christians, their wall and safe harbor; for thou dost 
bring their supplications before thy Son, O all-immaculate One, and savest from 
dangers those who with faith and love acknowledge thee to be the pure Theotokos. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The lawless and disobedient children nailed Thee to the Cross, O Lover of 
mankind, but in Thy compassion Thou hast, through it, saved those who glorify Thy 
sufferings. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
By arising from the grave, Thou hast raised with Thee all the dead in Hades, and 
in Thy loving compassion Thou hast enlightened those who glorify Thy Resurrection. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Theotokos, thou art the un-ploughed land that brought forth the ear of corn 
which granteth life unto the world, do thou save those who sing thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
All we who have been enlightened know thee, O all-pure one, to be the Mother of 
God, for thou, O Ever-Virgin, didst bear the Sun of righteousness. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
Made one with Thee by love, and purely and sincerely taking delight in Thee, the 
company of Thy Saints doth dance the perpetual dance with the angels in joy round 
about Thee, O Seer of all things, God and Lord of all.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
O glorious hieromartyrs, with youthful vigor, ye put on the crown of the martyrs, 
having already been adorned with the divinely-effectual chrism of the priesthood. 
Wherefore, O most noetically rich ones, having rightly received twofold crowns, ye 
rejoice with Christ eternally.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
Ye truly subjected the whole mind of the flesh unto the Spirit, O God-bearers, 
when by fasting ye utterly weakened its unruly impulses in an ascetical manner. And 
now, aflame with the light of passionlessness, ye have received the rewards of your 
labors.  
Glory ..., As martyrs of Christ, the First martyr, ye collectively endured torments 
with great steadfastness, contesting as though in the bodies of others, O glorious 
ones. And since ye have now been shown forth as heirs of the Kingdom, ye pour 
forth healings for the faithful.  
 Both now ..., Thou didst become the Bride of God, O Birthgiver of God, since 
for our sake thou didst give birth in the flesh, unto His Word Who is from before the 
ages. In Him women also have lived in a holy manner and have through thee adorned 
themselves with diverse contests, thereby setting aright the fall of our first mother.  
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * and 
why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * But do 
Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards the light of 
Thy commandments. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Savior, Thou didst endure being wrapped in a cloak as Thou wast mocked 
before Thy Passion, thus covering the unsightly nakedness of the First-formed Adam, 
and being nailed to the Cross naked, Thou didst strip from Thyself, O Christ, the 
tunic of death. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Rising out of the dust of death, O Christ, Thou hast refashioned my fallen nature 
and rendered it incorrupt, revealing it as once again a princely image, radiating with 
the light of incorruption. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Theotokion: Having obtained a mother’s freedom of speech before thy Son, O 
all-pure one, we beseech thee to neglect not thy maternal care for us, for thee alone 
do we Christians present to the Master as a compassionate means of atonement. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Guide us and grant us peace by the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, for by it we fall 
down before Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O our God, guide the lives of us who sing the praises of Thine arising, and grant 
us peace, O only Lover of mankind. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Calm the stormy tempest of my passions, O thou who hast given birth to God, 
my guide and my Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The ranks of angels and the companies of mortals worship thine Offspring, O 
most pure Theotokos. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
Like the divine prophets, ye were deemed worthy to behold the things to come 
which ye longed for. In nobility of soul ye purified yourselves by an august manner of 
life, O God-bearers, being enlightened by the might of the Spirit.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
The choir of the Saints is now adorned with divine gifts, even those who were 
before the Law, as well as the patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, and the assemblies 
of the martyrs, ascetics, and teachers, and the righteous together with the 
hieromartyrs.  
Glory ..., Beholding the company of Thy Saints shining today with Thy radiance 
and with unquenchable lamps of grace, O Savior, we unceasingly praise Thy divine 
wealth and bountiful good things, O Lover of mankind.  
 Both now ..., Since the all-modest women loved thy supremely wondrous 
Offspring, they accounted the delights of life as naught, O all-pure one; for with 
ardent love they desired His beauty and divine illumination alone.  
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of all, 
* and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who hymn 
thee. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and Thou 
hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Through a tree the author of evil hath mightily overthrown me, but raised upon a 
Cross, O Christ, Thou didst more mightily cast him down, confounding him, whilst 
raising me the one who had fallen. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou didst shine forth from the grave, then didst Thou take pity on Zion, 
and in Thy compassion didst renew it by Thy divine blood, and now O Christ, Thou 
dost reign over it as King throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: May we be delivered from grievous faults by thine intercessions, O 
pure Theotokos, and may we experience the divine radiance of the Son of God, who 
ineffably became incarnate from thee. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou didst stretch forth Thy hands upon the Cross, thus healing the hand of 
Adam the first-formed, which he so greedily stretched forth in Eden, and instead of 
the bitter tree, O Christ, Thou didst taste gall, and as all-powerful, Thou savest those 
who glorify Thy sufferings. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The Redeemer tasted of the ancient sentence of death that He might abolish the 
palace of corruption, and when He had visited those in Hades, He saved, as one all-
powerful, those who hymn the praises of His Resurrection. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Theotokos, we the faithful proclaim thee to be the Temple and Ark, the living 
Bridal Chamber of God, and the gate of heaven. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Mary, bride of God, thine Offspring, Who hath become the destroyer of wooden 
idols, is worshipped together with the Father and the Spirit. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
O Master, having found Thee to be a precious, choice and firmly set cornerstone 
in Sion, the Saints, like select stones, builded themselves thereupon, as though upon 
an unshakable foundation.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
When Thy side was pierced, the drops of blood fell together with the deifying 
water, and refashioned the world. And the divine host of all the Saints addressed 
Thee as Benefactor.  
Glory ..., We praise most reverently the God-inspired cloud of witnesses, who by 
grace were made luminous, and shine more resplendently in the royal purple of their 
blood and in the crimson of their steadfast contest.  
 Both now ..., We all know thee to be the all-true Mother of God, through whom 
the nature of women, having been given strength, contested for Christ, O all-
immaculate one, and in godly manner became filled with every virtue.  
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * O 
ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God who was 
born of her. 
Kontakion of the Saints, in Tone VIII: 
 To Thee, the Planter of creation, * the world doth offer the God-bearing martyrs 
as the first-fruits of nature. * By their supplications, preserve Thy Church in perfect 
peace, ** through the Theotokos, O Greatly-Merciful One.  
Ikos: Those who have borne witness in all the earth and thereby taken up their 
dwelling in the heavens, having imitated Christ’s Passion and thereby taken away our 
passions, have assembled here today, showing that the Church of the first-born 
presenteth an arch-type of the Church on high, crying out to Christ: Thou art my 
God, do Thou preserve me through the pure Theotokos, O thou Who art greatly 
merciful.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God’s condescension; * for 
which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in a 
meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Thy glorious self-emptying, constituting the divine wealth of Thy poverty, O 
Christ, amazed the angels when they saw Thee nailed to the Cross, saving those who 
with faith cry aloud, “O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Upon Thy divine descent the regions beneath the earth were filled with light, and 
the darkness which previously pursued those therein, was driven out. Therefore the 
prisoners from every age arose, crying aloud, “O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Trinitarian: Speaking of God with Orthodox belief, we proclaim Thee O Lord of 
all, to be Father of the one only-begotten Son, and we know only one right Spirit who 
proceedeth from Thee, consubstantial and co-eternal. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the inhabited world, O God, as the 
prophet said, for lifted up upon the Tree, Thou hast called back all those who cry out 
to Thee with faith, “O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Rising from the tomb as from sleep, O compassionate Lord, Thou hast raised the 
world with Thee, while creation, through the apostles’ preaching of Thine arising, 
hath been persuaded to cry to Thee. “Blessed are Thou O God of our Fathers!” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
For our salvation Thou didst appear incarnate from a virginal womb, and 
knowing Thy Mother to be the one who gave birth to God, we cry with thanksgiving, 
“Blessed are Thou O God of our Fathers!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Virgin, thou art the all-blessed rod from Jesse’s root, blossoming with a salvific 
fruit for those who with faith cry to thy Son, “Blessed are Thou O God of our 
Fathers!” 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
The orders of the Saints now enjoy godly delight as they unceasingly praise Him 
Who resteth in the Saints. Rejoicing, they form a choir and chant: Blessed is the God 
of our fathers.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
Made majestically radiant with the divine illuminations of the thrice-resplendent 
effulgence, the assemblies of the Saints piously speak with divine authority 
concerning the threefold Unity, even the co-beginningless Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
When Thou, O God, shalt be seen among gods in Thine ineffable glory bestowing 
due rewards and granting crowns unto each one, do Thou then deem us all worthy to 
chant unto Thee: Blessed is the God of our fathers.  
Glory ..., Let us joyously sing of the company of all the Saints, which is composed 
of every race, rank and way of life, and let us chant together with them: Blessed is the 
God of our fathers.  
 Both now ..., O all ye maidens, as ye together form a divine choir, cry out with a 
great voice: Be glad, O Mary, thou most pure and most holy Birthgiver of God, who 
didst make the Source of Joy to flow forth for us.  
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
In a manner befitting God, the supreme divine power of Jesus’ Divinity hath 
shone forth in our nature: for having tasted of death in the flesh upon the Cross for 
the sake of all, He hath abolished the strength of Hades. Without ceasing: O ye 
Youths bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The Crucified One hath arisen, the boastful One hath fallen, the fallen and 
crushed have been set upright, corruption hath been banished and incorruption hath 
blossomed forth; for mortality hath been swallowed up by life. “O ye Youths bless, O 
ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Trinitarian: The Godhead of triune light, the single radiance shining forth from 
one three-hypostatic nature, the Begetter without beginning, the Word of the Father, 
one with him in Nature and Kingship, and the consubstantial Spirit, “O ye Youths 
bless, O ye priests praise, O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Unto the Lord who, stripped naked, hath stretched out His hands upon the Tree 
for me, unto Him who doth call me and warm me with his noble nakedness, do all ye 
works of the Lord bless, and supremely exalt throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The Lord who hath raised me the fallen one, out of the lowest pits of Hades, and 
honored me with the high-throned glory of his Begetter, do all ye works of the Lord, 
bless, and supremely exalt throughout the ages. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Do thou quench the seductive and fiery darts of those who are our enemies, that 
we may hymn thee, O pure maiden, throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
In a manner transcending nature, O Virgin, hast thou given birth to God the 
Word, the Creator and Savior; therefore we hymn, and supremely exalt thee 
throughout all ages. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
O ye martyrs, prophets, and apostles; august assembly of hieromartyrs, the just, 
and the righteous; divine choir of teachers, together with the myrrhbearing women, 
rejoice as ye chant: Bless Him, O ye children; praise Him O ye priests; and supremely 
exalt him O ye people, throughout all ages.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
O ye Saints, who bear within yourselves the radiance that transcendeth the mind, 
and filled with divine gladness and joy, ye are called gods because of your nearness to 
God, standing in the presence of the deifying effulgence, ye have been enlightened 
with the rays of ineffable glory. supremely exalt ye Christ throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Let us bless Father, Son, Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
Having appeared as luminaries of many lights, O Saints, ye make radiant the 
heaven of the Church with various gifts and diverse beauties, in righteousness, 
chastity, courage and prudence, and ye cry: Praise Christ, O ye priests, and supremely 
exalt Him, O ye people, throughout all ages.  
 Both now ..., O all ye godly-minded women who have been perfected in Christ by 
the Spirit, as with gladness ye now encircle the immaculate Virgin and true Mother of 
God, who hath delivered us from the curse of our first mother Eve, praise ye now 
throughout the ages the Fruit that she hath borne.  
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and He 
gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
And we then chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)  
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God 
my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, * the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * as 
He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable ..., 
ODE IX 
Irmos: heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were filled 
with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy womb was 
rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the ranks of men and 
of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Begotten simply in Thy divine nature which is without beginning, Thou didst 
become compound in nature by assuming flesh, giving it essence in Thyself, O Word 
of God, and enduring the passion as a man, Thou didst remain beyond suffering as 
God, wherefore we magnify Thee in two natures inseparable yet uncommingled. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
In accordance with Thy divine nature, O Most High, Thou didst address God as 
Thy Father when Thou didst descend to Thy servants and become man; and having 
risen from the dead Thou didst make Him who is by nature God and Master, Father 
by grace, of those born of earth, wherefore we magnify Thee together with Him. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: When thou didst give birth in the body in a manner surpassing 
nature to the good Word, Who came forth from the Father’s own essence before all 
ages, as He alone is Good, thou O Virgin was revealed as the Mother of God. Him 
do we now comprehend to be beyond the nature of flesh, even though He is clothed 
in a natural body. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
We know that Thou art the Son of God by nature, conceived in the womb of the 
Theotokos, and that Thou didst become man for our sake, and, as we behold Thee 
hanging upon the Cross, we understand that Thou didst suffer in Thy human nature, 
yet as God Thou didst remain untouched by suffering. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Murky darkness hath been abolished, for from Hades Christ, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath dawned enlightening all the ends of the earth, radiant with the 
rays of his Divinity, man from heaven, God on earth, whom we magnify in two 
natures.  
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
We are filled with joy and gladness at the thought of thee, overflowing with 
healing for those who approach thee and devoutly proclaim thee to be the Mother of 
God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
With psalms we sing thy praises, O thou who art Full of the grace of God, and 
never silent, we offer thee our praises; for thou art a fount of rejoicing for all. 
Another, of the Saints: 
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  
Shielded with hope and love and fenced about with faith, the gathering of the 
chosen, even the foremost witnesses on behalf of the truth, nobly endured with 
rejoicing the tortures and stripes and all the threats of the tyrants, for they possessed 
Christ, Who bestoweth victory in contest.  
Refrain: All ye Saints of the Lord, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 25 ---
As is meet, let us now acclaim as a haven of salvation the Baptist, the apostles, the 
prophets, the martyrs, the ascetics, the divine teachers, the priests, the assembly of 
patriarchs, the noble hieromartyrs, the God-loving women, the righteous and the just.  
Glory ..., Since ye have been tried in the fire of temptations and were not enticed 
by pleasures, O ye glorious saints, assembling now in the heavens, the looking glass 
taken away, and the shadow covering truth dispelled, ye rejoice sincerely as ye stand 
before the Master’s throne of light.  
 Both now ..., Thou art seen to be the uniter of things which were separated, for 
through thee all have truly become fellow citizens with the angels in the heavens; and 
now the ranks of all the Saints bear witness together with them, as they praise with 
eternal songs Him Whom thou didst bear, O Virgin Theotokos.  
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-blessed 
Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-virgin. 
“Holy is the Lord our God” ..., in Tone VIII. (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion of the 1st Resurrection Gospel, in Tone I: 
Let us go with the disciples into a mountain of Galilee * to behold with faith 
Christ saying: * Let us learn to receive power over things above and below; * how to 
teach all the nations * and to baptize them in the Name of the Father, the Son and 
the Holy Spirit, * and as was promised I shall be even unto the end of the world ** 
with those who know the mysteries.  
Glory..., Exapostilarion of the Saints: 
With hymns let us crown as is meet the Baptist and Forerunner, the prophets and 
apostles with the martyrs and wise hierarchs, ascetics and hieromartyrs, the women 
who loved God and the just ones and the righteous ones, with all the ranks of angels, 
and let us pray and make supplication that we may also attain unto the glory which 
they have with Christ the Savior.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O most pure one, He Who is glorified on high by 
angels, hath ineffably descended to us without forsaking the bosom of the Father; for 
thou didst lend flesh to Him from thy pure blood in a manner transcending speech, 
thereby becoming the cause of our salvation. Beseech Him O pure one, that He grant 
remission of sins unto us thy servants.  
On the Praises, 8 Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall be to 
all His saints. 
O Lord, though Thou didst stand before the judgment seat * being judged by 
Pilate, * yet Thou wast seated with the Father * and was not absent from Thy throne. 
* And risen from the dead Thou hast freed the world from slavery to the stranger, ** 
as Thou art compassionate and the Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
O Lord, the Jews laid Thee as a corpse in a grave, * and soldiers guarded Thee as a 
sleeping king * sealing Thee with a seal as if a treasury of life; * but Thou didst arise 
** and grant incorruption unto our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the multitude 
of His greatness. 
O Lord, Thou hast given us Thy Cross as a weapon against the devil; * for he 
doth quail and tremble, unable to contemplate Thy power; * for Thou didst raise the 
dead and abolish death: ** Wherefore we worship Thy Burial and Thy Rising. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the psaltery 
and harp. 
Thine angel, O Lord, having proclaimed Thy Resurrection, * filled the guards with 
fear, * but he cried unto the women saying: “Why seek ye the living among the dead? 
* Being God He is risen ** granting life to the whole world.” 
Other Stichera by Anatolios: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and flute. 
Thou didst endure the Cross, * O Thou who art impassible in Thy Divinity, * to 
free us from slavery to the enemy * and Thou didst accept burial for three days, * 
making us immortal, * and granting life unto us through Thy Resurrection, ** O 
Christ God, Lover of mankind. 
Stichera of the Saints, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of jubilation. 
* Let every breath praise the Lord. 
The Lord hath made the Saints wondrous upon the Earth, * for they received His 
wounds and sufferings in the flesh, * with which they have been gloriously adorned, * 
arrayed in divine beauty: * Let us chant hymns unto them as unto un-withering 
flowers, * as unerring luminaries of the Church, ** for their sufferings were 
voluntarily. 
Verse: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them 
out of all their tribulations. 
Let us offer praise with sacred hymns * to the prophets, apostles, the 
hieromartyrs, and all the righteous, * and the woman who suffered greatly, * and 
those venerable ones who with love struggled in fasting, * and the hosts of the 
righteous ones, * for they have inherited the Kingdom on high, ** and they dwell 
now in Paradise. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His Saints, * the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Unto the martyrs who rendered the earth heavenly * with radiant virtues, * 
emulating Christ’s death and sufferings, * and having traversed the path that leadeth 
to immortality, * cleansing themselves of mortal passions * by the activity of divine 
grace, * they nobly contested throughout all the world, ** Let us offer them worthy 
hymns of praise. 
Glory..., the 1st Resurrection Gospel Sticheron, in Tone I:  
When the disciples were hastening to the mountain, * for His ascension from the 
earth, * the Lord stood by and they worshipped Him. * And, having been taught that 
power had been given to them everywhere, * they were sent forth to every land under 
the heavens * to preach the Resurrection from the dead, * and the restoration to the 
heavens. * And Christ, the God and Savior of our souls, ** promised to be with them 
eternally.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took flesh 
from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve set free, * 
death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise we cry: ** 
Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, glory be to 
Thee. 
Then the Great Doxology, and after it the Resurrection Troparion. 
Having risen from the tomb, and having burst the bonds of Hades, * Thou hast 
destroyed the sentence of death, O Lord, * delivering all from the snares of the 
enemy. * Manifesting Thyself to Thine apostles, Thou didst send them forth to 
preach; * and through them hast granted Thy peace to the world, ** O Thou Who 
alone art greatly merciful. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
Beatitude Verses: 6 of the Resurrection: and 4 of All-Saints - ODE VI: 
Remember us, O Christ, Thou Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the 
thief upon the Cross; and account us all worthy of Thy heavenly kingdom, O Thou 
Who alone art compassionate. 
Hearken, O Adam, and rejoice with Eve; for He who of old stripped you both 
naked, and by deception hath taken all of us captive, hath been set at naught by the 
Cross of Christ. 
Nailed of Thine own will to the Tree, O our Savior, Thou didst deliver Adam 
from the curse which came through the tree, and hast rewarded that which is in Thine 
image with a dwelling in paradise, in that Thou art compassionate. 
Today is Christ risen from the tomb, granting incorruption unto all the faithful; 
and He reneweth the joy of the myrrh-bearing women after His suffering and 
resurrection. 
Girded with power Thou didst ascend the Cross and wrestled with the tyrant, and 
as God hurled him from on high; but Adam hast Thou raised up with Thine 
invincible hand.  
Rejoice, O wise myrrh-bearing women, who were first to behold the resurrection 
of Christ, and who proclaimed to the apostles the glad tidings of the restoration of 
the whole world! 
O Master, having found Thee to be a precious, choice and firmly set cornerstone 
in Sion, the Saints, like select stones, builded themselves thereupon, as though upon 
an unshakable foundation.  
When Thy side was pierced, the drops of blood fell together with the deifying 
water, and refashioned the world. And the divine host of all the Saints addressed 
Thee as Benefactor.  
Glory ..., We praise most reverently the God-inspired cloud of witnesses, who by 
grace were made luminous, and shine more resplendently in the royal purple of their 
blood and in the crimson of their steadfast contest.  
 Both now ..., We all know thee to be the all-true Mother of God, through whom 
the nature of women, having been given strength, contested for Christ, O all-
immaculate one, and in godly manner became filled with every virtue.  
At the Entrance, the Troparia and Kontakia: 
Tone VIII: From on high didst Thou descend, O compassionate One; * to burial 
of three days hast Thou submitted * that Thou mightest free us from our passions. ** 
O our Life and Resurrection, O Lord, glory be to Thee. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
 Tone IV: Adorned in the blood of Thy martyrs * throughout all the world, as in 
purple and fine linen, * Thy Church, through them doth cry unto Thee, O Christ 
God: * Send down Thy compassions upon Thy people; ** grant peace to Thy flock 
and to our souls great mercy. 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: To Thee, O Lord, the planter of creation, * 
the world doth offer the God-bearing martyrs as the first-fruits of nature. * By their 
intercessions, preserve Thy Church, Thy commonwealth, in profound peace, ** 
through the Theotokos, O Greatly-merciful One. 
The Prokeimenon in Tone VIII: Make your vows * and pay them to the Lord 
our God. 
Verse: In Judea is God known, His name is great in Israel. 
And to the saints, in Tone IV: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of 
Israel. 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS: (11:33-12:2) 
Brethren: The Saints who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought 
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions. Quenched the 
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, 
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. Women received their 
dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they 
might obtain a better resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; Of whom the world 
was not worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of 
the earth. And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the 
promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should 
not be made perfect. 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Come, let us rejoice in the Lord; let us shout with 
jubilation unto God our Savior. 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them. 
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 
 
 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (10:32,33,37-38; 19:27-30) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: Whosoever therefore shall confess me before 
men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever 
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that 
loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that taketh not his 
cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me. Then answered Peter and said 
unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have 
therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have 
followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his 
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And 
every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or 
wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall 
inherit everlasting life. But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first. 
 
Communion Verse: Praise the Lord in the heavens, praise Him in the highest!  
Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright. 
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia! 
  
 
