APPENDIX

“Sing to the Lord a new song, a hymn in the assembly of the faithful.”
Ps. 149:1

SUPPLEMENT
1. We Praise You, O God

(A Hymn of Praise and Thanksgiving of St. Ambrose)

You are God; we praise You; You are the Lord; we acclaim You;
You are the eternal Father; all creation worships You.
To You all angels, all the powers of heaven, Cherubim and Seraphim, sing in endless praise:
Holy, holy, holy Lord, God of power and might, heaven and earth are full of Your glory.
The glorious company of apostles praise You. The noble fellowship of prophets praise You.
The white-robed army of martyrs praise You. Throughout the world the holy Church acclaims You:
Father, of majesty unbounded, Your true and only Son, worthy of all worship, and the Holy Spirit, advocate and guide.
You, Christ are the King of glory, eternal Son of the Father.
When You became man to set us free, You did not disdain the Virgin’s womb.
You overcame the sting of Death, and opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers.
You are seated at God’s right hand in glory. We believe that You will come, and be our judge.
Come then, Lord, sustain Your people, bought with the price of Your own blood,
And bring us with Your saints, to Your everlasting glory.

2. Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament and the Hymn of Supplication

The priest takes the Blessed Sacrament from the tabernacle and, facing the people, intones:

Priest: O saving Victim!
Choir: Open to us the gate of heaven; our enemies press us from every side; give us strength and help.
Priest: Praise be to You, Lord, one God in the Holy Trinity. (The priest then places the Holy Sacrament on the altar).
Choir: To You be endless praise, Who gives everlasting life in Your kingdom.

The priest then sings the following supplications:

Holy God, Holy Mighty One, Holy and Immortal One, have mercy on us (3x).
From pestilence, hunger, fire and war, deliver us, O Lord.
From sudden and unexpected death, deliver us, O Lord.
As sinners, we beseech You, our God, hear us, O Lord.
O Jesus, O Jesus, O Jesus, Son of God on high, have mercy on us sinners.
O Mary, O Mary, O Mary, Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.
O Saint Joseph, patron of the Catholic Church, pray for us sinners.
O Saint Josaphat, priest and martyr for Christ, pray for us sinners.
O Saint (name of the patron of the church), pray for us sinners.

The priest then blesses the people with the Blessed Sacrament, making the sign of the cross with it, intoning:

Save Your people, O Lord (2x).
The choir repeats this verse twice.
Priest (sings the third time): Save Your people, O Lord, and bless Your inheritance.
Choir: Rule them and exalt them forever. We bless You always, and we praise Your name, forever and ever. Grant that this day be without sin. Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us. May Your mercy be upon us, O Lord, since our trust is in You. In You, O Lord, we have placed our trust, let us not be condemned forever. Amen.

3. Panakhyda

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Then: Holy God, Holy and Mighty..., (and the usual beginning, p. 10).

Then troparia (Tone 4):
With the just spirits who have reached their end,* give repose to the soul(s) of Your servant(s), O Savior,* keeping them (him, her) in the happiness of life in Your presence,* O You Who love mankind.

In Your abode, O Lord,* where all Your saints repose,* give rest also to the soul(s) of Your servant(s),* for You alone love mankind.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
You are the God Who went down into Hades* and loosed the chains of those in bondage:* also to the soul(s) of Your servant(s), O Savior, give repose.

Now and for ever and ever. Amen.
Only chaste and immaculate Virgin,* who gave birth to God without seed,* intercede before Him for the salvation of their (his, her) soul(s).

Then the litany and dismissal (p. 447).

Panakhyda during Bright Week

Blessed be our God.... Amen and Christ is risen... (3x). Then the paschal verses: Let God arise... (p. 636); the litany for the deceased (see above); Wisdom! Shine O new Jerusalem... and the dismissal. Instead of Eternal memory: Christ is risen ...(3x).

Panakhyda from Thomas Sunday to the leave-taking of the Pasch

(dark or red vestments)

Everything as on ordinary Panakhyda, except that after Blessed be our God... and at the end, instead of Glory be: Now and for ever: and Eternal memory...we sing Christ is risen...; and instead of More honorable... Shine, in splendor, O New Jerusalem.... (see p. 648).

4. Short Typicon

Note: The hymn Blessed is the man... is sung every Saturday evening and on holydays, as well as on Polyeleos feasts; however, on the feasts of our Lord, it is sung only when these feasts occur on a Sunday or on a Monday. If a feast of our Lord falls on a Sunday, then the resurrectional service is omitted.

Abbreviations: theot. = theotokion; resur. = resurrectional; Gosp. Stich. = Gospel Stichera; St. = Saint; Gl. = Glory be; NF = Now and for ever; GN = Glory be: Now and for ever; t. = Tone; curr. = current.
Symbol for a Major (Solemn) Feast Day: ⊕
Symbol for a Polyeleos feast with Litiya: +
Symbol for a Polyeleos feast day: ✠

1. Non-polyeleos feast of a saint that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 7 resur. stich. and 3 St., Gl.: St., NF: dogmaticon curr. t. At the Aposticha: resur. stich.; troparion: resur.; Gl.; troparion St., NF: theot. t. of Gl.
Matins: After God the Lord: troparia as on Vespers. All the rest is taken from the resurrectional service.
Liturgy: Resurrectional service according to the curr. t.
Hours: For all the Hours: resur. troparion; the Gl.: for the 3rd and 9th Hours: troparion St.; for the 6th Hour: troparion of the patron St.; kontakion for the 1st and 9th Hours: resur.; for the 3rd Hour: kontakion St.; for the 6th Hour: kontakion of the patron St.. If there are two saints, then for the 9th Hour: troparion and kontakion of the second saint.

2. Non-polyeleos feast of a saint that falls on a weekday (except Saturday)
Vespers: “O Lord, I have cried...”: 3 stich. curr. t. and 3 St.; Gl.: St., NF: theot. (on Tuesday and Thursday evenings: the staurotheot.).
Attention: On Friday evening, at “O Lord, I have cried...”: 3 stich. St. and 3 curr. t.; GN: dogmaticon curr. t. At the Aposticha: stich. curr. t. Troparion: St.; GN: theot. as the tone of the troparion.
Matins: After God the Lord and at the end of Matins: troparion St., GN: theot.; sessionals, canon, Aposticha: curr. t.
Liturgy: The troparia of the day.
Hours: For the 1st Hour: the troparion and kontakion of the day; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the troparion and kontakion of the saint; for the 6th Hour: the troparion and kontakion of the patron saint.

3. Polyeleos feast that falls on a Sunday.
Vespers: If 10 stichera are taken at “O Lord, I have cried...”: then: 4 resur. stich. and 6 of the feast; Gl.: of the feast, NF: dogmaticon curr. t. After the prokimenon: the readings. At the Aposticha: resur. stich.; Gl.: of the feast, NF: the theot. from the resur. stich. at the Aposticha, according to the tone of the Gl. The resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast, NF: the resur. theot. in the tone of the Gl.
Matins: The resur. sessionals are followed by the polyeleos, exaltation, and the festal sessional. Everything else is taken from the resur. service. At the Praises: 4 resur. stich. and 2 of the feast; Gl.: Gosp. Stich., NF: You are truly most blessed...
Liturgy: Resur. troparion, Gl.: the troparion of the feast, NF: the resur. kontakion. Resur. prokimenon (or of the feast); the Epistle and Gospel: resur. (or of the feast). The Communion Verse: resur. and of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast. For the 1st and 6th Hours: resur. kontakion; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the kontakion of the feast.

4. Feast with Litiya that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: Glory be to the holy... Come let us adore... and Psalm 103. After the litany: Blessed is the man... At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich. and 6 of the feast. Gl.: of the feast, NF: dogmaticon curr. t., prokimenon, readings. The Litiya stich. of the feast. At the Aposticha; resur. stich., Gl.: of the feast, NF: the theot. from the resur. stich. at the Aposticha, according to the tone of Gl. Troparia: Hail, Mother of God... and the troparion of the feast. The rest of the service as on Litiya. After the dismissal: the kontakion of the feast.
Matins: After God the Lord: the resur. troparia; Gl.: of the feast, NF: the resur. theot. according to the tone of Gl. If it is the feast of the patron saint then the prokimenon and the Gospel of the feast are taken; the resur. canon; at the 9th Ode: It is truly right.... At the Praises: 4 resur. stich. and 2 of the feast; Gl.: Gosp. Stich.; (if it is the feast of the patron saint: Gl.: of the feast, Gosp. Stich. is taken at the end of Matins); NF: You are truly most blessed... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia.
Liturgy: Resur. troparion, Gl.: troparion of the feast, NF: resur. kontakion. The rest is the resurrectional service or the service of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast. For the 1st and 6th Hours: resur. kontakion; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: kontakion of the feast.

5. Feast of the Mother God that falls on a Sunday
Vespers with Litiya: Glory be to the holy... Come let us adore... and Psalm 103. After the litany: Blessed is the man.... At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich., 6 of the feast. GN: of the feast; prokimenon: The Lord reigns... and the readings. Litiya of the feast. At the Aposticha: resur. stich. GN: of the feast; troparion of the feast. Resur. dismissal with the commemoration of the feast of the Mother of God.
Matins: Resur. troparion; GN: of the feast; first and second resur. sessionals; the polyeleos, the exaltation, the third sessional of the feast; the gradual of curr. t., prokimenon, Gospel; after Psalm 50: stich. of the feast. At the 9th Ode: It is truly right... (the festal verses are omitted on Sunday); resur. canon and of the feast and the resur. exapostilarion. GN: of the feast. At the Praises: 3 resur. stich. and 3 stich. of the feast, Gl.: of the feast, NF: You are truly most blessed.... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia is taken. After the dismissal: GN: Gosp. Stich.
Liturgy: Resur. troparion; Gl.: of the feast; NF: kontakion of the feast. All the rest is the resur. service or the service of the feast. Instead of It is truly right...: the hirmos of the feast is taken.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: troparion of the feast. For the 1st and 6th Hours: the resur. kontakion; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the kontakion of the feast.

6. Feast with Litiya (or polyeleos) that falls on a week day.
Vespers with Litiya: Glory be to the holy... Come, let us adore..., Psalm 103, Blessed is the man.... At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 6 stich. of the feast, Gl.: of the feast, NF: the dogmaticon according to the tone of the Gl. The entrance, readings; stich. of Litiya; at the Aposticha: the stich. of the feast. Troparion of the feast, and Hail, Mother of God.... After the dismissal: the kontakion of the feast.
Matins: After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast. GN: resur. theot. of the tone of the troparion. Sessionals of the feast, polyeleos, exaltation, gradual of the feast, the Gospel and stich. of the feast. At the 9th Ode: It is truly right... (except on Jan. 30, June 24, and June 29), canon, the Exapostilarion and the stichera. At the Praises: of the feast, after the great doxology: troparion of the feast, GN: resur. theot. in the tone of the troparion.
Liturgy: Troparion and kontakion: of the feast, NF: theot.; prokimenon, Communion Verse, Epistle and Gospel: of the feast.
Note: The order of the service of a polyeleos feast on a week day is the same as that of the order of the service of a feast with a Litiya on a week day, with only this exception, that there is no Litiya, and that Vespers begins with: Blessed be our God..., Heavenly King..., etc. After NF: You shall dismiss...: the troparion of the feast, GN: the resur. theot. according to the tone of the troparion, and then immediately the great dismissal.
Hours: For all the Hours: the troparion and kontakion of the feast.

7. Feasts of the Lord and of the Theotokos on a week day.
Vespers: Glory be to the holy..., Come, let us adore..., Psalm 103. Blessed is the man... is taken only on the feasts of the Theotokos and on the feasts of our Lord, but only when they fall on a Sunday or on a Monday. At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 6 stich., GN: of the feast. Readings, stich. of Litiya, Aposticha: of the feast. Troparion of the feast. After the dismissal: kontakion of the feast.
Matins, Hours, and Liturgy: Everything of the feast.

8. Postfeast that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich., 3 of the feast and 3 of the saint; Gl.: of the feast, NF: the dogmaticon of curr. t. Aposticha: resur.; GN: of the feast. Resur. troparion, Gl.: St., NF: of the feast.
Matins: After the troparia and the exapostilaria: NF: of the feast. Canon: resur. At the Praises: 4 resur. stich., 2 of the feast, Gl.: Gosp. Stich., NF: You are truly most blessed.... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia is taken.
Liturgy: If it is a postfeast of the feast of our Lord: 1st antiphon: of the feast, the 3rd antiphon with verses: of the feast. The resur. troparia and of the feast, Gl.: resur. kontakion, NF: the kontakion of the feast. All the rest as on Sunday. Instead of It is truly right... the hirmos of the feast. The Communion Verse: of Sunday and of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: resur. troparion; Gl. for 1st and 6th Hours: the troparion of the feast; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: troparion of the saint. The kontakion for the 1st and 6th Hours: of the feast; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: resur. kontakion.

9. Postfeast with Litiya or Polyeleos that falls on a week day.
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 3 stich.: of the feast 3 of the saint Gl.: St., NF: of the feast (on Friday evenings: dogmaticon of curr. t.); readings. Aposticha: stich. of the saint, GN: of the feast. Troparion of the saint; GN: of the feast. Dismissal of the feast with the commemoration of the saint.
Matins: After God the Lord... and at the end of Matins: the troparion of the saint, GN: of the feast. Sessionals and exapostilarion of the saint; GN: of the feast. At the Praises: 2 stich. of the feast and 2 of the saint, Gl.: St., NF: of the feast. The great doxology.
Liturgy: If it is a postfeast of our Lord’s feast: the first and third antiphons: of the feast (on the postfeast of the Theotokos: daily antiphons). Troparion and kontakion of the saint, NF: of the feast. The prokimenon, Alleluia, Epistle, and Gospel: of the saint. Instead of It is truly right...: the hirmos of the feast. Communion Verse of the feast and of the saint.
Hours: For all the Hours: the troparion of the feast, Gl.: St. For the 1st and 6th Hours: kontakion of the feast; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: the kontakion of the saint.

10. The leave-taking of a feast that falls on a Sunday
Vespers: The service of the saint of the day is transferred to another day. At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 4 resur. stich., 6 of the feast, Gl.: of the feast, NF: dogmaticon. At the Aposticha: resur. stich., GN: of the feast. Resur. troparion, GN: of the feast. The great dismissal with the resur. commemoration and of the saint.
Matins: After God the Lord...: the resur. troparion, GN: of the feast. Everything else is from the resurrectional service. It is truly right..., is taken. The resur. exapostilarion; GN: of the feast. At the Praises: 4 resur. stich. and 2 stich. of the feast, Gl.: Gosp. Stich.; NF: You are truly most blessed.... After the great doxology: one of the two resur. troparia.
Liturgy: Antiphons: of the feast. Resur. troparion; Gl.: troparion of the feast, NF: kontakion of the feast. Resur. prokimenon and Alleluia; Epistle and Gospel: resur. Instead of It is truly right...: the hirmos of the feast. Communion Verse: resur. and of the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the resur. troparion, Gl.: of the feast. The kontakion for the 1st and 6th Hours: resur.; for the 3rd and 9th Hours: of the feast.

11. Leave-taking of a feast that falls on a week day.
Vespers: At “O Lord, I have cried...”: 6 stich. of the feast, GN: of the feast. (On Friday evenings: NF: dogmaticon of the curr. t. There is no entrance or readings. At the Aposticha: stich. of the feast. The troparion of the feast (once). The small dismissal with the commemoration of the feast and of the saint.
Matins: The troparion of the feast (once). Sessionals of the feast, Psalm 50; the 9th Ode with verses and the exapostilarion as on the feast. At the Praises: the stich. of the feast. After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast (once). The great dismissal.
Liturgy: The Epistle and Gospel: of the day; the rest as on the feast.
Hours: For all the Hours: the troparion and kontakion of the feast.
