COMMON OF APOSTLES

VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 4, Podoben – Jako dobl’a): O most fortunate disciples, you are blessed,* since you were eyewitnesses of the incarnate Word.* you have appeared to the world as flashes of lightning.* As spiritual leaders you have poured out the sweetness of the Word.* you shared your knowledge like the ever-flowing rivers of paradise.* you gave the drink of divine waters to the Church of the Gentiles.

you were sent into the world as spiritual rays of light.* you have performed many miracles.* O most sacred mystics, you were ministers of the mysteries of Christ* and of the tablets of divine grace* inscribed with the law of God.

Through divine teachings, the rod of the fishermen* has put an end to the waverings of philosophers* and the ceaseless talk of orators.* they have clearly revealed doctrines and the mysteries of grace,* the communion of the eternal food,* the delight of angels, and the everlasting glory.

If it is a Polyeleos, we may take three more stichera from the stichera at the praises (p. 1185).

Glory be: (Tone 4): O disciples of the Savior,* you have gone out into the world and have enlightened it.* By your teachings you have consumed the deceit of idolatry like brushwood.* you saved nations, and delivered them from the depths of unreason to divine wisdom;* therefore, intercede with Christ today,* that He grant us mercy on the day of judgment.

Now and for ever: (theotokion): Rejoice, O death to demons!* Rejoice, O daughter of Adam, most flourishing and unwilting flower!* Rejoice, O glory of your servants!* Rejoice, most immaculate One, and forgiveness of wicked ones!* Rejoice, O gift of salvation granted to the world by God!* Rejoice, O precious One of those who call upon you!* Rejoice, O Mother, glory of those who extol you!

Now and for ever: (staurotheotokion): As you beheld your Son on the cross, O all-pure One,* a sword pierced your heart and you cried out:* Do not leave me alone, my Son and my God,* Who preserved me a virgin even after childbirth.

If it is a Polyeleos – Now and for ever: the Dogmaticon (Tone 4), (p. 271): on Friday and Saturday evenings: Now and for ever: the Dogmaticon of the tone of the week.

Prokimenon of the day: if it is a Polyeleos, then the following readings are taken:
- 1 Pt 1:3-9, (p. 924);
- 1 Pt 1:13-18;
- 1 Pt 2:11-24 or
- Acts 2:37-47.

Aposticha (if it is a Polyeleos)

(Tone 6, Podoben – Tretoho dnia): O blessed apostles, you were the servants,* the theologians, the God-seers, and the disciples of the great mysteries of God.* you received the grace of healing and healed the illnesses of all.* Therefore, beg Christ to heal our souls.

Verse: Through all the world their voice resounds; their message reaches to the ends of the earth.

O God-seers, apostles of Christ,* you have become a great protection* and shelter for our souls and expellers of evil spirits.* For this, we always honor you.

Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.

From every threat and demonic assault,* from error and cruel bondage, deliver all who in faith praise you,* O divine and blessed apostles.

Glory be: (Tone 8): O divine apostles, leaders of salvation and intercessors for all the faithful,* having enlightened all the earth with sacred preaching,* you drove away the fog of vanity;* and led all who once were in the darkness of unbelief to the light of the knowledge of God.* For this reason, we honor you.

Now and for ever: O most pure Virgin, who gave birth to God!* O Mother of the most high God!* Accept the prayers of your servants, O all-immaculate One,* and grant to all forgiveness of sins.* And having received our supplications, pray that we may all be saved.

This theotokion we also take on Friday and Saturday evenings.

MATINS (if it is a Polyeleos)

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): The spiritual choir of apostles of the most high God* was mysteriously sent into the world* and appeared as physicians of all those suffering in captivity.* Invoking the Triune God,* they wisely expounded the divine incarnation of Emmanuel, the Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: As the unburnable bush which Moses saw,* the mountain of God, the holy cloud, the most pure ark,* the divine altar, the palace of the great King,* the most radiant and impassable gate – we extol you, O Virgin!

(Tone 4): O apostles of the Lord, heavenly ministers of the mysteries!* As stars, you illumine the ends of the earth with the bright rays* of the instructions of your holy preaching.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Let us, faithful, glorify the Mother of God,* for she is the ardent protection of those in need;* she is our help and our conversion to God.* Because of her we were delivered from final damnation.

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O holy apostles,* who through your preaching enlightened the whole world* and brought all the nations to Christ.

Verse: You establish them as kings over all the earth.

Verse: Your lightning flashes illuminate the entire universe.

Verse: He gives strength and power to His people. Blessed be God!

Glory be: Now and for ever:

Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 3): O divine trumpets of the Comforter!* You proclaimed the gospel of salvation to the world;* you awakened those who were slumbering in the darkness of deceit,* and led them to the light of the knowledge of God.* O apostles of the divine Light,* implore Christ our God to save our souls.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 18 (Tone 4)
Through the world their voice resounds;* their message reaches to the ends of the earth.
Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.

Gospel: Lk 10:1-16. After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday; then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): The glorious feast of the apostles of Christ’s Church has arrived, bringing salvation to all. Therefore, let us rejoice and cry out to them: Rejoice, bright stars of the spiritual Sun, lamps to those groping in darkness. Rejoice, immovable foundations of the divine teachings, friends of Christ, honorable vessels. Come invisibly among us and make worthy of heavenly gifts those, who celebrate your feast with hymns.

Canon – Ode 9

Hirmos (Tone 4): Christ the cornerstone not cut by hand was cut from you, the unhewn mountain, O Virgin, thus uniting two distinct natures in Himself. Therefore, rejoicing, we magnify you, O Mother of God.

Verse: O holy apostles, pray for us to God!

Having received from the Master power to loose the bonds of sins, O eye-witnesses of God, mercifully cleanse the sins of those who honor you, and make them worthy of salvation.

Verse: O holy apostles, pray for us to God!

To you, His departed friends, Christ grants never-fading crowns, and fills you with the divine vision. Implore Him now to save all the churches.

Glory be: Now and for ever: He, Who adorned the universe with but a word, desired to come down in the flesh and take up His abode in you, O Virgin Mother; for He has found you to be the holiest of all, and has manifested you as the true Mother God.

Katabasia: according to the rules or repeat the hirmos above.

Exapostilarion: O apostles of the Lord,* you traveled to the ends of the earth* and preached the truth of the incarnation of the Lord from a virgin,* converting nations from deceit,* and enlightening and teaching all to worship the Holy Trinity.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 8): O Lord, You have illumined Your apostles with the radiance of the Comforter,* and, owing to the spiritual enlightenment of Your wisdom,* You have established them as lamps for the strengthening of the faith, O Master!* Therefore, we adore Your unspeakable love for mankind.

Through the prayers of the apostles, O Lord,* You have fenced in Your flock,* preserving them unharmed from the temptations of the enemy;* for You, the compassionate Lover of mankind,* redeemed it from the bondage of the Devil with Your precious blood.

you have manifested yourselves as precious stones in the foundation of the Church,* illuminating the universe with a bright light of the clear knowledge of God,* O divine apostles. you now stand before the throne of the Triune God,* praying for our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): Save us, O Mother of Christ our God,* from every misfortune, so that we may cry out to you: Rejoice,* O only mediatrix of our souls.
