--- PAGE 1 ---
TUESDAY EVENING: TONE I 
AT VESPERS 
On ‘‘Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Nailed to the Cross as a man, О Christ God, Thou didst deify human nature 
and slay the serpent, the author of evil. Becoming accursed in that Thou art 
compassionate, Thou didst free us from the curse which hath its origin in the tree. 
And Thou didst come that Thou mightest give blessing and great mercy unto all. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Though Thou art exalted far above all honor, О Master, Thou didst deign to 
be dishonored, enduring a violent death upon the Tree, that when Thou didst die 
in the flesh, О Almighty, through it the race of mankind might embrace 
immortality and receive again its primal life. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
О most precious Cross, purification of all the faithful, sanctify all who bow 
down before thee and glorify Christ, Who stretched out His most pure hands 
upon thee in His ineffable loving-kindness, and Who hath gathered together all 
the ends of the earth. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these 
Stichera of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Standing before the Cross of thy Son and God, and perceiving His long-
suffering, the pure Mother said, weeping: “Woe is me, О my Child most sweet! 
What things are these that Thou sufferest unjustly, that Thou mightest save 
mankind, О Word of God?” 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Standing by the Cross, О Bride who knewest not wedlock, and undergoing 
pain, thou didst cry aloud: “Show me not to be childless, who gave birth to Thee, 
О my Child! Leave me not alone, О Only-begotten One Who with the Father art 
equally eternal!” 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
“When I gave Thee birth, I felt no pain. How now do I experience pangs 
when Thou art unjustly crucified, О Word?”, the pure one cried out, weeping. 
“Woe is me! I cannot bear to see Thee uplifted upon the Cross, О Lover of 
mankind!” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Stavrotheotokion: 
Of old, when thou didst behold thy Son and Master stretching forth His hands 
upon the Cross, His side pierced by the spear, О pure Mother, thou didst cry out, 
lamenting: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou sufferest, ridding men of their 
suffering, О Lover of mankind?” 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone I:  
The Cross was set up on Golgotha, and hath blossomed forth immortality for 
us from the ever-flowing fountain of the Savior’s side. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
The precious Cross of the Savior is for us an indestructible rampart; for, 
placing our trust therein, we all are saved. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О how good was your barter, О saints! For ye traded your 
blood and inherited heavenly things; and having undergone trials for a time, ye 
rejoice everlastingly. Of a truth your commerce was good! For, having forsaken 
corruptible things, ye received those things which were incorrupt; and joining 
chorus with the angels, ye unceasingly hymn the consubstantial Trinity. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Stavrotheotokion:  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Spec. Mel.: “Joy of the ranks of heaven ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb * lifted up upon the Cross, * the 
immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this 
new and most glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things in Thy 
hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TUESDAY NIGHT: TONE I 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it 
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the 
deep.  
He Who is incomprehensible to the armies of heaven received flesh of thy 
flesh, О all-immaculate maiden, and hath restored her who became corrupt 
through the first sin of disobedience. 
О ye faithful, with hymns let us bless her who gave birth to the Word of God 
in a manner past all telling; for she, the most immaculate one, hath been revealed 
to be the adornment of mortals, becoming the intercessor for all who sin. 
Glory ..., Thou hast been shown to be more spacious than the heavens, for 
thou didst contain the Creator of all things, О Ever-virgin Mother. Wherefore, I 
cry to thee: Deliver me from all deadly straits, О divinely joyous one. 
Both now ..., О pure one, grant help to us who are tempest-tossed by the 
turmoil of tribulations; cast down the wicked uprisings of our enemies; and grant 
salvation to all who glorify thee with piety. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
He Who is full hath emptied Himself for our sake, and He Who is 
beginningless hath received a beginning through thee, О most immaculate Virgin; 
the Invisible One is seen, and He Who sustaineth all things is fed with milk, 
intending thus to restore mankind. 
Heal thou our broken state, О Virgin who knewest not wedlock, who hast 
given birth to the Lord and Healer Who through grace hath shown us the entry to 
life. Him do thou unceasingly beseech, that He have pity and save thy servants. 
Glory ..., О most pure one, who alone hast deified human nature in a manner 
transcending nature, pray thou to Him Who was born of thee, that He grant us 
forgiveness offenses and everlasting joy, О all-hymned and most holy Virgin. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Having wasted my life in slothfulness, I fall down before thee, О 
most pure one: by thy constant supplications to God move thou my mind and 
with the radiance of repentance enlighten me who am wholly darkened, that I may 
glorify thee with faith and love. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain 
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy 
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and 
restoration. 
We know thee as the divine palace of the Word, wherein He made His abode 
in the flesh and hath restored us who had been corrupted by the passions. 
Wherefore, О pure one, we honor thee as the Mother of God, and we glorify Him 
Who was born from thee. 
The incarnate Word made His abode within thy womb, О Virgin. He hath 
dispelled the curse which before resided in human nature, and by His divine union 
He hath in a godly manner deified it. Wherefore, we hymn thee. 
Glory ..., Mortality seized Adam because he tasted of the fruit of corruption, 
О all-immaculate one; but now, by thy birthgiving, he hath been restored to life 
and dwelleth in the mansions of paradise. Wherefore, we hymn thee as is meet. 
Both now ..., Having given birth to Christ God, the Wellspring of immortality, 
thou hast caused the torrent of death to cease. Him do thou therefore entreat, О 
thou who art full of the grace of God, that He heal the deadly passions of my soul 
and save me. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten 
with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right 
worship hymn Thee.  
The never-setting Sun shone forth from thy womb, О most immaculate one, 
and hath utterly destroyed the darkness, and illumined the earth with divine 
understanding. Wherefore, we hymn thee with faith. 
We cry out to thee with the voice of the angel: “Rejoice, О most pure one!” 
For thou hast given birth to the angel of great Counsel, Who with the Father is 
beginningless, О Virgin, and Who assumed flesh that He might save mankind. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Making His abode within thy womb, О pure one, the Lord delivered 
those who piously believe in Him from the dominion of the enemy; wherefore, we 
all hymn thee aloud, О most pure one. 
Both now ..., Clothing Himself in me, the Master issued forth from thee, О all-
immaculate one, deifying human nature. Him do thou entreat, О Birthgiver of 
God, that He strip me bare of every sin. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to 
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save 
Thy people O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the 
weak. 
Without seed thou didst conceive God in thy womb, and after thy strange 
birthgiving thou didst remain a virgin, О all-immaculate one; wherefore, we who 
have been delivered from the curse by thee glorify thee with praises, О most pure 
one. 
Thou art the ladder which Jacob saw, the mountain overshadowed, the most 
radiant cloud of the divine Light, the door through which God alone hath passed. 
Blessed art Thou among women, О most immaculate one! 
Glory ..., In a manner transcending the laws of nature, О Virgin who knewest 
not wedlock, thou hast given birth to the hypostatic Word of God Who healeth 
our broken state. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He save us all. 
Both now ..., Bearing my soul which is sick with transgressions, I cry to thee, 
О most holy, most glorious and pure one: Heal and save me by thy mediation, 
that I may hymn and magnify thine aid. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Possessing thine intercession, O most pure one, * and delivered from evils by 
thy supplications, * protected wholly by the Cross of thy Son, ** we all reverently 
magnify thee as is meet.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; 
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so 
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou 
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
The shadows of the law and the former indistinct images of the divinely 
eloquent prophets manifestly proclaimed thy seedless birthgiving, О most pure 
and all-immaculate one. And we cry out, hymning the hymned and most glorious 
God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
О pure one full of the grace of God, thou hast given birth to the Sun of the 
East, Who hath illumined the fullness of all the faithful and caused the night of 
impiety to fade. Wherefore, we honor the hymned and most glorious God of our 
fathers. 
Glory ..., Once, О all-immaculate one, the bush which burned yet was not 
consumed prefigured thy womb, for the fire of the Godhead in nowise consumed 
thee. Wherefore, I entreat thee: Deliver me from the unquenchable fire, that I may 
unceasingly hymn thy mighty works, О pure one! 
Both now ..., О Mother of God, help of the faithful, cleansing of the sinful, 
giver of all good things: in thy compassion accept me, who fall down and 
approach thee with weeping, begging release from mine offenses. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone 
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: 
Bless the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
The images of the law and the formerly unclear images clearly foretold that 
thou wouldst become the pure Mother of the Lord, О Virgin; and we, beholding 
now the fulfillment of these things, hymn thee together and glorify thee 
throughout all ages. 
Thou hast indisputably been adorned with divine beauties among beauties, О 
all-immaculate one, having given birth to the Word of God, Who illumineth with 
divine beauties the hearts of all who hymn Him with faith throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., With sacred voices the prophets said of old that thou wouldst 
become the all-immaculate Mother of God the Master. To Him do we cry aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works! Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Both now ..., In that thou art beauteous and all-comely, О Virgin, thou gavest, 
birth blamelessly to Christ Who is comely in beauties. To Him do we cry aloud: 
Bless the Lord, all ye works! Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
ОDE IX 
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * 
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may 
unceasingly magnify Thee. 
The nature of mortals, which before was condemned, О Virgin, hath received 
immortality through thy supra-natural and divine birthgiving; and they have 
received their former beauty, praising thee together with joyous hymns. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thou bearest Him Who beareth all things, and thou feedest with milk Him 
Who giveth food unto all. Great and awesome and past understanding is thy 
mystery, О Virgin Theotokos, thou ark of the honored priesthood! Wherefore, we 
all call thee blessed. 
Glory ..., О most pure one, shine light now upon me who lie in the darkness 
of slothfulness, freeing me from the thoughts of the passions which blind me, О 
all-immaculate one, and ever imparting profound peace to my soul, that I may 
glorify thee. 
Both now ..., I fear the implacable judgment seat and the impartial Judge, О 
most immaculate one; for the multitude of mine offenses is beyond number, in 
that I live in slothfulness, wholly consumed by the passions. Wherefore, moved to 
pity, have mercy on me, О Theotokos. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., and 
the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone I: 
When Thou wast crucified, О Christ, tyranny perished and the power of the 
enemy was trampled down; for it was neither an angel nor a man, but Thou 
Thyself, О Lord, Who saved us. Glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * 
for He is holy. 
We bow down before the tree of Thy Cross, О Lover of mankind, for Thou 
wast nailed to it, О Life of all, opening paradise to the thief who came to Thee 
with faith, and granting food unto him when he confessed Thee, saying: 
Remember me, О Lord! As Thou didst accept him, so do Thou also accept us 
who cry: We have all sinned! In Thy tender compassion disdain us not! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee, the Lamb, crucified on the Cross with two 
thieves, Thy side pierced by a spear, the Ewe-lamb exclaimed, crying out 
maternally, О long-suffering Word: “What is this strange and awesome mystery 
which is ineffa­bly being wrought, О my Jesus? How is it that Thou coverest 
Thyself with a tomb, О infinite God. Forsake me not who gave Thee birth, О my 
Son most sweet!” 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
Save О Lord, Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance, grant now unto the 
faithful victory over adversaries, and by Thy power of Thy Cross, do Thou 
preserve Thy commonwealth. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
Once, the weapon of the Cross appeared to the pious Emperor Constantine as 
an invincible victory over his enemies, because of his faith; for the adverse powers 
tremble before it. It was the salvation of the faithful and the boast of Paul. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Be Thou entreated by the pangs of the saints, which they 
suffered for Thee, О Lord; and heal all our pangs, we pray Thee, О Lover of 
mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Stavrotheotokion: Possessing thine intercession, O most pure one, * and 
delivered from evils by thy supplications, * protected wholly by the Cross of thy 
Son, ** we all reverently magnify thee as is meet.  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”: 
When the sun beheld Thee willingly suspended in the flesh upon the tree of 
the Cross, in the tender compassion of Thy mercy, О Word, it was unable to bear 
the blasphemy and hid its rays. Enlighten my darkened soul with Thine 
unapproachable light, and save me, I pray Thee. 
О Compassionate One Who stretched out Thy hands upon the Cross, Thou 
didst gather together the nations which before were far from Thee, that they 
might glorify Thy great goodness. Look upon Thine inheritance, and by Thy 
precious Cross cast down those who wage war against it. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon 
the Tree, * the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud, weeping * and exclaiming 
maternally: * “How is it that Thou dost willingly endure abasement and sufferings 
* which surpass all telling, ** O my Son, and supremely good God?”  
ODE I 
Canon of the precious & life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “I am 
saved by the Cross of the Master Who suffered,” the composition of 
Joseph, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Having been delivered from bitter slavery, * Israel traversed the 
impassable as though dry land; * and beholding the enemy drowned, * they 
chanted unto God as to their Redeemer, * Who worketh wonders with His 
upraised arm, * for He hath been glorified.  
Lifted up upon the Cross, О Christ, with Thyself Thou didst raise up fallen 
mankind and didst cast down all the power of the enemy, О Word. Wherefore, I 
hymn the sufferings of Thee Who suffered and hast delivered me from the 
passions. 
Thou art the Lord of glory, О Thou Who hast crowned mankind with glory; 
and Thou wast crowned with thorns, that Thou mightest make fruitful our thorny 
nature, О Planter of divine deeds. 
To the martyrs: The most holy assembly of the saints who suffered lawfully 
sanctified all creation with the outpouring of their blood and in God the Father 
abolished the abominable sacrifices offered to the demons. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
To the martyrs: О most holy martyrs, clouds of tortures did not obscure your 
patient struggles; wherefore, ye were revealed to be brighter than the beams of the 
sun, О glorious ones, manifestly emitting rays of salvation. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, thou wast consumed by the sword of the 
sufferings of thy Son, for thou didst see pierced by a spear Him Who hath 
withdrawn the sword which barred the way into paradise, and which forbade 
divine entry even to the faithful. 
Another canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone I:  
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it 
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the 
deep.  
Grant me streams of spiritual tears, О all-immaculate one who gavest rise to 
the Wellspring of remission Who washeth away the defilement of sin and bringeth 
forth my life in humility. 
In conceiving God, thou didst become more exalted than creation, О pure 
one; wherefore, I beseech thee: Raise me up out of the mire of the passions, and 
lead me up to the divine heights of dispassion. 
On the day of judgment show thyself to be merciful unto me, I pray, О pure 
one, delivering me from the dreadful standing on the left hand of Christ, and from 
grievous torment, for I flee beneath thy protection, О most pure Lady. 
Raise me up who am beset by the darkness of sin and have fallen, О most 
pure one, and grant me a shower of tears whereby I may wash away my vile deeds; 
for thee alone do we have as a helper, О Theotokos. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Let no mortal boast in his wisdom or wealth, * but rather in his faith 
in the Lord, * crying out to Christ God in an Orthodox manner, * ever 
chanting: do Thou Establish me O Master, * upon the rock of Thy 
commandments!  
The iniquitous made holes in Thy hands and feet, О my Jesus, Who of old 
ineffably fashioned man by Thy hand, and Who by suffering Thy passion hast 
freed all from corruption, О Christ God. 
“Let the moon and the sun stand still!” cried Joshua, prefiguring the dimming 
of the heavenly lights when the Master suffered in the flesh upon the Cross, 
whereby the evil princes of darkness have been put to shame. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
To the martyrs: The glorious martyrs earnestly endured wounds; and, 
wounded, they mightily wounded the serpent Belial. Wherefore, they ever heal the 
wounds of our souls at the command of God. 
To the martyrs: Ye demolished the temples and alters of the demons, О 
martyrs, and by your courage and pangs most gloriously raised yourselves up 
through grace as temples in which the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit dwelt. 
Theotokion: Beholding at the time of the Passion Him Who is fair in beauty 
bereft of comeliness and beauty, thou didst bitterly cry aloud, О pure Virgin, 
exclaiming: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou sufferest, О my Son, desiring to 
deliver all from the passions?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
О most pure one, thou didst become a temple for Him Who reigneth over all. 
From the oppression of the soul-destroying thieves rescue me who have become a 
den for them, and show me to be the pure abode of the divine Spirit. (Twice) 
Send me a shower of tears which drieth up the torrents of my wicked deeds, I 
pray, О thou who hast given birth to Christ our God, the tranquil deep of loving-
kindness, О all-hymned Virgin Theotokos. 
О divinely joyous and most pure Theotokos, be thou for us strength and an 
unshakable pillar, a shield and invincible sword, repelling the hordes of the noetic 
foe from us who honor thee with faith and love. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Of old, Habbakuk heard wondrous report of Thee O Christ, * and 
cried aloud in fear: * God shall come forth from Theman, * the Holy One 
from the mountain overshadowed and densely wooded, * to save His 
anointed ones! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Stripes and wounds didst Thou endure, О Christ, healing the wounds of our 
hearts; and tasting bitter gall, Thou didst remove the curse of the sweet taste of 
corruption; and, nailed to the Tree, thou didst lift the ancient curse. 
Uplifted upon the Cross, Thou didst bring nigh the nations who had rejected 
Thee, and didst reconcile us to the Father, О Long-suffering One; and as 
Mediator Thou didst set Thyself between us, and in the midst of the earth didst 
endure a violent death. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
To the martyrs: Overwhelmed by the sea of your blood, О divinely blessed 
ones, the noetic Pharaoh and all his armies drowned; wherefore, saved, ye came 
with joy to the promised land and became citizens of heaven. 
To the martyrs: Given life by the suffering of Christ, the blessed ones were 
able to withstand all manner of sufferings in their honored flesh; wherefore, they 
cause the sufferings of souls and bodies to cease for those who ever praise and 
call them blessed. 
Theotokion: Beholding Thee unjustly sacrificed, О Christ, she who gave Thee 
birth cried out to Thee, lamenting: “O my Son, Thou righteous Judge, how hast 
Thou been unjustly condemned, desiring to justify those who of old were 
condemned and stumbled headlong into corruption?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain 
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy 
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and 
restoration. 
О good one, disdain me not who am sorely diverted from the commandments 
of God by the lies of the demon; but have pity, I pray, and show me to be 
immune to his deception, О most pure one, for I flee to thy mercy. (Twice) 
О Christ God Who alone art merciful, through the supplications of her who 
gave Thee birth have mercy and take pity on those who set their hope on Thee, 
and guide them to the light of Thy commandments, and grant them life 
everlasting. 
By thy tireless prayers, О most pure one, rouse me who have fallen into the 
sleep of death, and who, weighted down by the chains of my transgressions, 
languish in the tomb of despair; and show me the way to repentance, I pray thee. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Do Thou shine forth O Christ Thy never-waning light * upon the 
hearts of those who hymn Thee with faith, * granting us peace beyond 
understanding; * Wherefore by Thy light we flee the night of ignorance * 
coming unto the day, * glorifying Thee O Lover of mankind.  
Beholding Thee, Who suspended the earth upon the waters, hanging naked on 
the Tree, О Savior, the sun stripped away its light; and when the stones felt Thee 
lifted up upon the rock of Golgotha, they split asunder in fear; and the 
foundations of the earth quaked. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Uplifted upon the Tree, and run through with nails, Thou didst stain Thy 
fingers with blood, О Long-suffering One; and pierced by a spear in Thy side, 
Thou didst heal the wound of Adam, which he received when he listened to Eve, 
his rib, and disobeyed the One Who created her. 
To the martyrs: The multitude of the martyrs was shown to be paradise, with 
Christ as the Tree of life in its midst. For enduring a violent death for Him with 
brave resolve, they slew the serpent with divine power, who through food had 
brought death upon the first of our race. 
To the martyrs: With drops of blood ye dried up the abyss of ungodliness, О 
spiritual athletes of Christ; and with divine outpourings of sacred miracles ye 
overwhelm the torrents of the passions of soul and body. Wherefore, ye are 
rightly called blessed. 
Theotokion: Beholding Christ uplifted of His own will, the immaculate one 
marveled and cried aloud, weeping: “O my Son and God, though I escaped pain 
in giving birth unto Thee, I now suffer pangs as Thou art crucified unjustly by the 
iniquitous!” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten 
with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right 
worship hymn Thee.  
The torrents of my many transgressions have engulfed me and brought down 
the temple of my soul, О most pure one; but as thou art the restoration of our 
first parents, О Theotokos, raise me thy servant up. (Twice) 
Extending thy hand, О Lady, raise me up who am sinking in the mire of the 
passions, wretch that I am, and am foundering amid the storm of my many 
offenses; and guide me to the haven of repentance. 
Grant me cleansing of the defilements of my soul, heal the pangs of my flesh, I 
pray, and by thy supplications lift the grievous despondency which besets me. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: I am held fast in boundless passions, * and have fallen into the sea-
monster of evil; * but do Thou lead me up from corruption O God, * as 
once Thou didst Jonah, * and by faith grant me dispassion, * that I may 
offer a noetic sacrifice of praise and salvation * unto Thee.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
When Moses raised up his arms, he provided an image of the Passion of Thee 
Who stretched out Thy hands on the Tree and destroyed the pernicious dominion 
of the evil one; wherefore, we hymn Thee, knowing Thee to be our Redeemer and 
Savior, О Lover of mankind. 
Uplifted upon the Tree, Thou didst endure death and didst put to death him 
who brought death upon us; and having brought life again to the work of Thy 
hands, О Christ, pierced in the side with a spear Thou didst pour forth remission 
with both hands, О Thou Who art hymned as having two wills. 
To the martyrs: Precious in the sight of the Lord hath your memory become, 
О ye saints, who have honored all by your honored sufferings, and have put to 
shame Belial, who employeth every wile and every form of torment to cast us all 
down. 
To the martyrs: With all your soul ye surrendered yourselves to multifarious 
tortures, О all-wise ones, and ye found all the helping aid of Him Who clothed 
Himself in all humanity. Wherefore, as your members were severed and ye felt the 
fire, ye rejoiced. 
Theotokion: Beholding Thy crucifixion, the most pure one cried aloud: “O my 
Son, what strange sight is this that I see? How is it that Thou, O Christ, Who 
healest the sufferings of the sick, dost endure new sufferings? How have Thine 
enemies rewarded Thee, O Benefactor, for the grace they have received?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to 
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save 
Thy people O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the 
weak. 
О most pure one, with the spear rend asunder the record of my transgressions, 
for the sake of Him Who was born of thy seedless womb, and grant that I may be 
entered in the book of the elect, for I flee to thy divine protection. (Twice) 
Through the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, cleanse Thy 
servants, О Christ, in that Thou art good, and send down forgiveness offenses 
upon them, for Thou art the Savior and Redeemer of all who set their hope on 
Thee. 
О most pure Virgin who hast given birth to the Bestower of life, by thy 
supplications bring life now to me who have been slain by the passions, and show 
me to be victorious over the evil foe; for thee alone do we have as a helper in the 
sight of God. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Having passed through the unbearable flame of the furnace * as 
though it were a bridal-chamber, * the children who for the sake of piety, * 
were revealed as holy * chanted together, singing the hymn: * O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Though Thou art Master, О my Jesus, a servant smote Thee, for Thou didst 
desire to free me who am held in thrall by the enemy; and, nailed to the Cross, 
Thou savest me who chant: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
All creation trembled, О compassionate Lord, when Thou wast crucified; and 
when Thy side was pierced by a spear, the enemy was wholly wounded; and Thou 
didst heal wounded Adam, who cried: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
To the martyrs: Protected by the Cross, the glorious army of passion-bearers 
destroyed the hordes of the enemy by grace, and received crowns of victory, 
crying aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
To the martyrs: Having acquired a will stronger than fire, О spiritual athletes, 
ye were cast into fire but were not consumed, utterly consuming the evil tinder of 
ungodliness, and crying aloud: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Theotokion: Thine Offspring, О Virgin, most gloriously gave rise unto the 
ages; and, uplifted upon the Cross, with Himself He raised up the fallen and 
showed them to be dwellers in heaven, who cry: О God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou! 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; 
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so 
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou 
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
In that thou hast given birth to the Wellspring of life, О most pure one, with 
thy life-bearing right hand resurrect my dead soul, and grant that I may cry out in 
compunction of heart: О supremely praised God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
(Twice) 
God Who existeth from before all ages deigned to become the new Adam 
through thy pure blood. Him do thou now entreat, that He renew me who have 
grown old, but who cry: О supremely praised God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou! 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Descending upon me in wrath, the enemy pitilessly desireth to carry away my 
lowly soul, О most pure one; but foil his intent, and have pity on me who chant: 
О praised God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew * was an image and prefiguring of a 
wonder past nature, * burning not the children whom it had received, * so 
the fire of the Godhead consumed not the Virgin's womb * into which it 
had descended. * Therefore in song let us sing: * Let the whole creation 
bless the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Of Thine own will Thou wast crucified on the Cross, О Thou Who with Thy 
hand unfurled the sky; and Thou wast pierced by nails, desiring to set aright the 
terrible stumbling of first-created Adam. Wherefore, chanting, we sing: Let all 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
When the hard-hearted assembly lifted Thee, the Rock, up upon the rock of 
Golgotha, the mountains quaked and the earth shook, О Word of God; but timid 
souls were made steadfast in divine life, and ever cry: Let all creation bless the 
Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
To the martyrs: The holy passion-bearers manifestly wove the vesture of 
salvation for themselves, suffering patiently in bodily nakedness, and withstanding 
a heavy onslaught of wounds; wherefore, chanting, they sing: Let all creation bless 
the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
To the martyrs: Though their nails were mercilessly torn out and their 
members pitilessly severed, though they were subjected to all manner of wounds, 
the passion-bearers did not offer sacrifice to graven images, but showed 
themselves to be towers of courage for the faithful, crying: Let all creation bless 
the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Theotokion: “The mindless assembly, desiring to provoke Thee, considered 
how to remove Thee from the earth. I have become childless and am troubled, 
and my maternal heart is filled with pain!” she who knew not a man once cried 
out, as she beheld Thee nailed to the Cross. And with her creation glorifies Thee, 
the Redeemer of all, О Jesus, throughout all ages. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone 
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: 
Bless the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Enlighten the eyes of my heart, О pure one who art the portal of the Light, 
dispelling the deep darkness and cloud of the passions, that I may chant: Hymn 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
(Twice) 
О pure, all-immaculate Lady, never cease to pray for all who call upon thee as 
the Mother of God and cry out: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
О all-hymned Virgin, who hast ineffably given birth to Christ, the Source of 
salvation, pray for all who fervently cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord! Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Ineffable is the mystery of the Virgin: * for she is heaven and the 
throne of the cherubim, * and hath been revealed as the radiant bridal-
chamber * of Christ God Almighty. * Wherefore we piously magnify her as 
the Theotokos.  
When of old the wise thief beheld Thee, Who unfathomably suspended the 
earth upon the waters, hanging upon the Tree, О Savior, he cried out to Thee with 
faith: Remember me! And with him we piously glorify Thy sufferings. 
Crucified, Thou didst shake the foundations of the earth; and when Thou wast 
pierced by the spear, Thou didst pour forth drops of immortality: Thy Blood and 
water; whereby Thou didst cleanse mankind of the passions, О Jesus. Wherefore, 
chanting, we magnify Thee. 
To the martyrs: The valiant saints rejoiced amid their tortures, encouraging 
themselves as for something delightful, and crying aloud: “Let us stand firm! 
Behold! Christ hath opened the contest, and will now bestow wreaths upon those 
whom He hath loved!” 
To the martyrs: The whole united assembly of the faithful is enlightened, 
honoring the sufferings of all the invincible martyrs and their myriad pangs. For, 
for their sake they have been granted sweetness and life without pain, and 
everlasting delight. 
Theotokion: The maiden who ineffably gave birth to the Word, the Lover of 
mankind, beholding Him voluntarily suffering at the hands of men, cried aloud: 
‘What is this? God Who is beyond suffering doth undergo suffering, that He 
might deliver from suffering those who worship Him with faith!” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * 
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may 
unceasingly magnify Thee. 
Take away the heavy burden of mine offenses, О all-hymned Theotokos, and 
grant that I may bear the yoke of thy Son and God, which is most light, and may 
tread the path which leadeth to perfection on high. (Twice) 
I tremble, О all-immaculate one, when I think of the dread day of the coming 
of Christ; for all my life hath ended in sins, and my soul is full of the passions. But 
have pity on me, and deliver me then from all damnation. 
О most pure Lady, accept the prayers of thine unprofitable servant, and 
transform the turmoil of my soul and body into profound serenity, that, saved, I 
may magnify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone I: 
We unceasingly hymn Thee as Savior and Master, Who wast nailed to the Tree 
and hast given us life. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
By Thy Cross have angels and mankind been united into one flock, О Christ, 
and in a single assemblage heaven and earth rejoice, crying: Glory be to Thee, О 
Lord! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Neither tribulation, nor oppression, nor starvation, nor 
persecution, nor wounds, nor the raging of wild beasts, nor the sword, nor the 
threatening fire were able to separate you from God, О all-praised martyrs; and ye 
forgot your own nature, struggling as in others’ bodies, and spurning death out of 
great love for Him. Wherefore, as is meet ye have received reward for your pangs, 
and have become inheritors of the kingdom of heaven. Pray ye unceasingly on 
behalf of our souls. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing by Thy Cross, О Word of God, the unblemished 
Ewe-lamb, Thy Mother, cried out, lamenting: “Woe is me, О my Son! How is it 
that Thou diest upon the Cross? Woe is me, О my sweet Light! Where now hath 
the visage of Thy beauty gone, О Thou Who art more comely than all men?” 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone I: 
By food the enemy led Adam out of paradise, but by the Cross Christ led back 
into it the thief who cried out: Remember me, О Lord, when Thou comest in Thy 
kingdom! 
Thou didst endure violent suffering, О Christ, and didst remove from us our 
reproach, О good One. And Thou hast shown us to be sharers in the kingdom on 
high, who worship Thy condescension. 
О Christ Who coverest the nakedness of Adam, Thou wast stripped naked in 
the flesh; and when Thou wast uplifted upon the Cross, Thou didst raise us up 
from the abyss of evils. Wherefore, we glorify Thy holy condescension, О Word. 
To the martyrs: О all-famed martyrs, who with your stripes lashed a multitude 
of the demons, with grace ever truly heal all the wounds and stripes of men. 
Glory ..., The Trinity enlighteneth all who offer It pure worship, and 
acknowledge that It possesseth indestructible dominion. Wherefore, let us cry out 
thereto: О Trinity, save those who hymn Thee! 
Both now ..., Standing by the Cross and beholding Christ nailed in the flesh, 
the most immaculate one cried aloud, exclaiming: “Where now hath the beauty of 
Thy glory gone, О loving Lord?” 
 
On Wednesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon, the hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
