--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING 
AT VESPERS: TONE I 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
О glorious apostles, divinely chosen disciples of Christ, teachers of the whole 
world, who found the Lord God, Who is the Mediator between God and 
mankind: Unto Him did ye cleave in godliness, and throughout the world ye 
manifestly preached Him as God and as a supremely perfect man. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
O most wise apostles, divinely chosen disciples of Christ, teachers of the 
whole world: By your prayers strengthen me, that I may obey the teachings of 
God; and ever help me to walk the narrow path, that I may achieve a most 
spacious rest in paradise. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
I hymn as eyewitnesses and preachers of the Word Peter the first enthroned, 
Paul and James, Andrew and Philip, Simon, Bartholomew and Thomas, Matthew 
and John, and Mark and Luke who recorded the Gospels, who with the seventy 
others are the divinely chosen choir. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera 
of the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker , in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Soaring aloft above the flowers of the Church, О thrice-blessed Nicholas, as a 
fledgling from the angelic nest of the Most High thou ever callest unto God on 
behalf of all the people who find themselves in the midst of violent tribulations 
and temptations, delivering them by thy prayers. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Ascending through the beauties of heaven, thou didst gaze upon the awesome 
glory of the Holy of holies. Wherefore, thou dost ever disclose unto us heavenly 
words of the vivifying sight thereof, О most sacred father. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
The adornment of priestly vestments didst thou render more splendid by thine 
active virtues, О God-bearing father; wherefore, for us thou performest sacred 
acts of wondrous miracles for the sake of Christ, delivering us from evils. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Tempest-tossed on the abyss of transgressions, * fleeing to the calm haven * of 
thy most pure supplication, * I cry out to thee, O Birthgiver of God: ** Save me, 
O all-immaculate one, extending thy mighty right hand unto thy servant!  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone I: 
The harmonious harp of the apostles, played by the Holy Spirit, abolished the 
abominable sacrifices of the demons; and, proclaiming the one Lord, it hath 
delivered the nations from the delusion of idolatry, and taught them to worship 
the consubstantial Trinity. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Together let us praise Peter and Paul, Luke and Matthew, Mark and John, 
Andrew and Thomas, Bartholomew and Simon the Canaite, James and Philip; and 
let us laud the whole choir of the disciples, as is meet. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О all-famed martyrs, the earth did not hide you, but heaven 
received you, and unto you were opened the gates of paradise. And since ye have 
entered therein, ye delight in the tree of life. Pray ye unto Christ, that He grant our 
souls peace and great mercy. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O Virgin, * thou joy of the forefathers, * gladness of the apostles and 
martyrs, ** and protection of us thy servants!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE I  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He 
hath been glorified.  
The bush prefigured thee, О Birthgiver of God; for, remaining unconsumed, 
thou didst truly hold the unbearable Fire. Wherefore, with faithful voices we ever 
hymn thee. 
God the Word, clothing Himself in human nature, became incarnate from thee 
in a manner transcending understanding, О most pure one. Wherefore, every 
breath doth glorify thee and renders thee homage, and honor, as is meet. 
Glory ..., О most pure one, thou didst conceive the ineffable Word Who 
upholdeth all the ends of the earth, and thou hast given birth to Him. Him do 
thou earnestly beseech, that He have mercy on us. 
Both now ..., In that thou alone hast given birth within time to the timeless 
God incarnate, О most pure Lady, heal thou the immemorial sufferings of my 
passion-plagued soul. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon 
the waters, * O all-powerful One. 
That He might deify humanity, God became man through thee, О pure Virgin, 
in a manner past all telling and understanding. Wherefore together we, the faithful, 
call thee blessed. 
He Who by nature is uncircumscribable became circumscribed, incarnate from 
thee, О pure one who art full of the grace of God. Him do thou unceasingly 
entreat, that He take pity and enlighten the souls of those who bless thee. 
Glory ..., Dispel all the fruitlessness of mine unfruitful thoughts, and show 
forth my soul as fruitful in the virtues, О most holy Theotokos, thou helper of the 
faithful. 
Both now ..., Deliver me from every evil circumstance, from the many 
temptations of the serpent, and from eternal fire and darkness, О most 
immaculate one who for us hast given birth to the never-waning Light. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of 
the Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, 
Thou shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown 
forth! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
Christ made His abode within thy most pure womb, О all-holy Lady, and 
deified us, assuming animate flesh. Wherefore O pure Mother, we hymn thee in 
an Orthodox manner, О Lady, thou helper of the world. 
Sanctify us, О holy Theotokos who hast given birth in the flesh to the Most 
holy One Who desired to become like unto men; and by thy supplications, О 
most pure one, show us all to be partakers of the heavenly kingdom. 
Glory ..., О Virgin Theotokos, undefiled tabernacle, with the pure beams of 
thy compassions cleanse me who have defiled myself with transgressions, and 
grant me a helping hand, that I may cry: Glory to Thy power, О Lord! 
Both now ..., Thou wast revealed to be a temple sanctified for God, О Virgin, 
and He made His abode in thee in a manner transcending understanding. Him do 
thou beseech, that He wash away the defilement of our sins, that we may be 
shown to be temples and habitations of the Spirit. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God 
than Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the 
living and the dead. 
The wicked eating which once was done in Eden made me mortal; but do 
thou, О pure one who hast given birth to Life, restore me to life who have been 
slain by the tree of old, that I may lift up my voice in hymns, glorifying thee. 
О all-pure one, save me from cruel tribulations! Raise me up from the vile 
passions, and from the captivity and oppression of the evil demons deliver me 
who honor thee with love. 
Glory ..., О pure Virgin Mother, we know thee to be the cloud and garden of 
paradise, the portal of the Light, the table and fleece, and the jar holding within 
thee the Manna which is the delight of the world. 
Both now ..., О most immaculate one who hast given birth to God, 
Emmanuel, Who in His loving-kindness manifestly became a man: Him do thou 
beseech, that He have pity on sinful people, in that He is the Lover of mankind, О 
pure one. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Lead my life up from corruption O Christ God, * as didst Thou the 
prophet Jonah, * I cry to Thee O Lover of mankind, * for with Thee is life, 
incorruption and might.  
I entreat thee who art the good and undefiled tabernacle: By thy mediation 
wash away all defilement from me who have been defiled by many sins. 
О pure one, be thou guidance for me who am tempest-tossed upon the cruel 
abyss of the perils of life; direct me to the harbor of salvation, and save me. 
Glory ..., The threefold billows of evil thoughts, the assaults of the passions 
and the abyss of sins bestorm my wretched soul. Heal me, О holy Lady! 
Both now ..., О Mary who art called the tabernacle of sanctification, sanctify 
my wretched soul which hath been defiled by pleasures, and make me a partaker 
of divine glory. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”: 
О Virgin who gavest nourishment to One of the Trinity, О beauteous garden 
of paradise, salvation of mortals: by thy protection save those who piously hymn 
thee, for thou hast given birth to Him Who spake in the prophets, and didst bear 
Him Who upholdeth all things, in that thou art the Mother of Christ God. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither 
touched nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a 
single mouth * Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.' 
The Son of the beginningless Father made His abode within thy womb, 
receiving a beginning, that He might deliver us who worship Him from the evil 
princes of darkness, in that He is God, О pure Birthgiver of God. 
Arrayed in divine virtues, О pure Virgin, thou hast given birth to the Word 
Who with the Father is beginningless, and hath truly covered the heavens with 
virtues. Him do thou ever entreat, that He have pity on us. 
Glory ..., Sanctify our thoughts, make steadfast the souls of all, О Mother of 
God, that we may execute well the judgments of the Word of the beginningless 
Father Who, in His ineffable loving-kindness, became incarnate from thee, О 
Virgin. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Revive my mind which hath been slain by many passions, О 
most immaculate one, and strengthen me to do God-pleasing works, that I may 
magnify thee ever as the helper and hope of Christians. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
By thy vigilant supplications to God, О most immaculate one, we who 
acknowledge thee to be the blessed and all-joyous Theotokos are delivered from 
all manner of temptations. 
In a godly manner the Incorporeal One became incarnate from thee. Him do 
thou entreat, О most pure one, that He mortify the passions of my flesh and 
revive my soul, which hath been slain by sins. 
Glory ..., О most pure one who hast given birth to God the Savior, Who hath 
healed the abasement of Adam: Him do thou beseech, that He heal the incurably 
painful wounds of my soul. 
Both now ..., Raise me up who lie in the abyss of evils, and vanquish the 
enemies who now assail me, the unseemly pleasures which eat away my soul. 
Disdain me not, О pure one, but have pity and save me! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of 
all descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom 
He was incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as 
the pure Mother of God.  
О most immaculate one who hast given birth to the divine Light Who shone 
forth from the Father, have pity on my soul, which hath become darkened by the 
deceptions of life and is become an object of mockery to mine enemies; and grant 
unto me the light of saving repentance, О pure one. 
О most immaculate one, Isaiah beheld thee as a luminous cloud from whence 
the Sun of righteousness hath shone forth upon us, mystically to enlighten 
creation. Wherefore, with faith we hymn thee who art beautiful among women. 
Glory ..., Loving sin, I live in slothfulness, О pure one. I tremble before the 
unfailing judgment, at which do thou preserve me uncondemned by thy holy 
prayers, О Virgin Bride of God, that I may ever bless thee as my helper. 
Both now ..., I tremble before the judg­ment and the inescapable eye of thy 
Son, having committed many sins on earth. Wherefore, I cry to thee: О all- 
merciful Lady, help me! О pure one, rescue me uncondemned from my need at 
that time! 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., and 
the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, these  
Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone I: 
О most wise fishers of the whole world, having received compassion from 
God, pray ye now also for us who cry out: Save Thy people, О Lord, and for the 
sake of the apostles free our souls from the evils which beset us. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the end of the world. 
О ye faithful, in hymns let us honor the all-wise apostles: the melodious 
trumpets of Christ, the steeds which by grace roil the sea of ungodliness and draw 
all forth from the abyss unto the divine haven of salvation. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Having acquired Mary the Theotokos as an unassailable bulwark, come, ye 
faithful, let us bow down and fall prostrate before her; for she hath boldness 
before Him Who was born of her, and entreateth Him, and saveth our souls from 
wrath and death. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
Destroying the webs of the rhetors with the net of the word and the reed of 
the Cross, the fishermen enlightened the nations, that in piety they might glorify 
Thee, the true God; wherefore, we cry out a hymn unto Thee Who strengthened 
them: Glory be to the Father and to the Son! Glory be to the Holy Spirit Who is 
of the same essence! Glory be to Thee Who through them hast enlightened the 
world! 
Verse: The heavens * shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. 
Shining forth timelessly, the Light Who is from Light entered time and 
appeared on earth in the flesh; and through you, О all-blessed ones, He 
enlightened the earth. Wherefore, illumined by your divine teachings, we honor 
your sacred memory, О apostles. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: We all pray to the martyrs of Christ, approaching them with 
love, for they pray for our salvation, pouring forth the grace of healings and 
repelling hordes of the demons, in that they kept the Faith. 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most holy Virgin, hope of Christians, with the hosts on high do thou 
unceasingly beseech God to Whom, in a manner surpassing understanding and all 
telling, thou hast given birth, that He grant forgiveness of all our sins and 
correction of life unto those who with faith and love ever glorify thee.  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
О radiant disciples of the Savior, ye noetic luminaries, having illumined the 
whole world as with fire, I pray that by your brilliant rays, О most blessed ones, 
my soul, which is in darkness, may be illumined. 
О holy hierarch father Nicholas, who dwelt bodily in Myra, thou wast revealed 
to be anointed noetically with the myrrh of the Spirit, and with thy miracles 
emitting sweet fragrances, and pouring forth ever-flowing myrrh upon Myra, 
which is perfumed by thy myrrh-like hymns and thy memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The prophets clearly proclaimed thee beforehand as the Mother of God, О 
maiden. The divine apostles proclaimed thee in the midst of the world, and we 
have believed on thee. Wherefore, we all right reverently hymn thee and ever call 
thee the true Theotokos. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy apostles, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it 
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the 
deep.  
Illumined by the divine rays of the effulgence of the threefold Sun, О glorious 
and radiant apostles, ye truly became gods by adoption; wherefore, as is meet, we 
honor you with faith. (Twice) 
Ye became faithful ministers of the Word Who in His tender compassion 
appeared on earth in the coarseness of the flesh, and being fulfillers of all His 
precepts by faith, О apostles, ye are ever honored. 
О ever-blessed ones, with the radiant beams of the most holy Spirit enlighten 
the whole of me, who am enshrouded in the darkness of sins; and manifestly 
guide me to the path of repentance. 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate Birthgiver of God and Lady, who art the joy of 
the apostles: In that thou art Mother to Him Who hath divinely spoken in them, 
pray with them, that He deliver me from the fire of Gehenna. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Another canon, of our father among the saints Nicholas the 
wonderworker, the acrostic whereof is “Unto thee, О Nicholas, do I offer 
a first hymn,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He 
hath been glorified.  
Adorned with crowns of righteousness, and standing before the throne of 
grace, О Nicholas, by thy supplications ever save those who in hymns now crown 
thee with faith. 
О all-blessed Nicholas, who hast been granted the grace of healings, by thy 
supplications heal the wounds of my soul, and deliver me from the temptations 
which beset me, I pray thee. 
By thy mighty supplication, О Nicholas, heal my soul, which is wholly 
paralyzed by my transgressions, and deliver me from the cruelties of life, I pray 
thee. 
Theotokion: With thy light dispel the gloom from my mind, О all-immaculate 
one, and deliver me from everlasting darkness, that I may ever hymn thy mighty 
works. 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
God, Who alone is invisible, became visible when He became incarnate; and 
He chose you as disciples for the whole world, to proclaim His name and 
surpassing glory, О most blessed, divine apostles. (Twice) 
Against Thee only have I sinned, О Christ, against Thee only have I 
committed iniquity; and I have defiled my soul with evils. By Thy mercy cleanse 
and save me, for I have Thy most wise apostles entreating Thee, О Jesus Who 
alone art readily appeased. 
О merciful apostles, deliver me from the bitterness of the defilements of 
passions and sins, sweetening my thoughts with repentance, in that ye have divine 
sweetness in your hearts, О all-praised ones. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: With the immaterial ministers, with all the hosts on high, with the 
martyrs and the apostles, О Virgin who knew not wedlock, entreat Christ, to 
Whom thou gavest flesh from thy pure blood, that thy servants may be saved. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon 
the waters, * O all-powerful One. 
O wise Nicholas, adornment of high priests, sweet savor of the divine Spirit: 
By thy prayers, redolent of myrrh, drive away the fetid passions from my heart, I 
pray thee with love. 
I have reached the end of my life in slothfulness, wretch that I am, and fear 
thy dread tribunal, О Christ. Put me not to shame, but be Thou entreated by the 
sacred mediations of Nicholas. 
О holy hierarch Nicholas our father, who art adorned with divine grace, from 
divers temptations and misfortunes save those who ever flee to thy protection, О 
all-blessed one. 
Theotokion: Deliver me from all perils, from the many temptations of the 
serpent, and from everlasting fire and darkness, О all-immaculate one, who for us 
hast given birth to the never- waning Light. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain 
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy 
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and 
restoration. 
Roiling the sea of ungodliness and unbelief by your riding forth like horses, О 
divinely chosen apostles of Christ, ye drowned the noetic foe and drew those 
drowning unto salvation. (Twice) 
О apostles, ye receptacles of the divine effulgence of the Spirit, with the light 
of repentance enlighten my darkened soul, which hath become a receptacle of all 
manner of passions, О divinely blessed and godly apostles. 
О clouds who let fall the water of life, divinely give drink unto my soul, which 
is desiccated by the drought of the passions, and grant it to produce the grain of 
salvation and the virtues, О all-praised apostles. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: О all-famed apostles, with the prophets and martyrs, and the 
Mother of the Redeemer, earnestly pray that we may be delivered from sins, from 
everlasting torment, from temptations, misfortunes and tribulations. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of 
the Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, 
Thou shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown 
forth! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
As the fulfiller of all the precepts of God, О holy hierarch Nicholas our father, 
by thy supplications enable us on earth to keep the laws which lead to salvation; 
and deliver us from all the temptations which assail us. 
Having finished thy course for Christ in holiness, direct thou our ways unto 
Him, О God­bearing father Nicholas, that, having escaped from wandering in 
trackless wastes, we may attain unto thy saving protection. 
О most wise father Nicholas, who set at naught all the wiles of the enemy, 
through thy divine watchfulness fill all of us with grace who keep vigil, hymn 
God, and set thee before Him as an advocate. 
Theotokion: Enlightened in mind by the Spirit of God, the prophet described 
thee beforehand, О pure one, as the mountain overshadowed. By grace and thy 
right acceptable mediations, О Theotokos, cool now those who are burning up 
with the heat of many transgressions. 
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten 
with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right 
worship hymn Thee.  
Ye were shown to be mountains giving rise to sweetness and beauteous 
gladness, О all-glorious apostles, washing away all the bitterness of the enemy and 
delighting the faithful. (Twice) 
Ye understood that Christ had come to His own people as a sojourner, and ye 
cleaved unto Him sincerely. Wherefore, deliver me from the harm of the alien 
one, О divine apostles of the Word. 
Heal Thou the hidden wounds of my soul through the supplications of those 
who in a sacred manner preached in the world Thy divine coming, Thy sufferings 
and rising from the tomb, О Compassionate One. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: With all the incorporeal ones entreat God the Word, to Whom 
thou gavest flesh in a manner past all telling, О Virgin Theotokos, that thy 
servants may be freed from irrational acts and the carnal passions. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early 
at dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover 
of mankind, * Christ our God.  
Planted in the courts of the Lord, О holy hierarch Nicholas our father, like a 
fruitful olive-tree, by grace thou now anointest the faces of all with the oil of thy 
labors. 
Make entreaty now on behalf of thy servants, О father Nicholas, that we may 
receive remission offenses and may be delivered from the tribulations which 
surround us and from all oppression. 
Thee do we beseech, О Nicholas, our good mediator before the Lord: Leave 
us not without help, О holy one, but save us by the prayers, that thou art wont to 
make. 
Theotokion: О maiden full of the grace of God, splendid temple of Christ: By 
thy prayers to the Father, the Son and the Spirit, make temples of us who 
accomplish holy things. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to 
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save 
Thy people O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the 
weak. 
With noetic nets ye fished for the nations, drawing them forth to the 
understanding of Him Who doth edify us, О divinely blessed apostles. Him do ye 
earnestly entreat on behalf of the world. (Twice) 
О lowly soul, О wretched soul, О unrepentant soul: Repent, and cry out unto 
Christ: I have sinned! By the supplications of Thine apostles cleanse me, О Master 
Who lovest mankind, in that Thou art supremely good. 
О Almighty Christ, Who of old didst pour forth water from a rock for Israel, 
by the supplications of Thine apostles dispel my gloom and cause me to produce 
torrents of tears, in that Thou art greatly merciful, that I may hymn and magnify 
Thy tender compassion. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: О Virgin, entreat as our Creator and God, Him Who in His 
goodness was well-pleased to be born from thee, that He may save from 
temptations and perils those who ever hope in thee, О most holy one. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Emulating the prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
О Christ, possessing a multitude of compassions, through the supplications of 
Nicholas dispel the multitude of mine evils, and ever guide my life, which is 
battered by waves of sin. 
Thou hast trampled mightily the enemy underfoot, О wise Nicholas. By thy 
prayers strengthen us also to crush him, for we have been enriched by thy divine 
intercession. 
О Nicholas, who wast the true primate of the people of Myra, perfume the 
senses of our souls, and ever drive away the fetid passions which war against us. 
Theotokion: Christ hath accomplished mighty works in thee, О pure one. Him 
do thou ever beseech, that He magnify in us His rich mercy, О thou who art full 
of the grace of God. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; 
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so 
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou 
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
The Lord Jesus, the Wellspring of life, left you, His disciples, as rivers 
imparting the waters of the knowledge of God as drink to the whole world, for ye 
chant: Praised and supremely glorious is the God of our fathers! (Twice) 
Bearing in your hearts the noetic Fire, the divine grace of Christ, 0 disciples, ye 
burned up the tinder of ungodliness; wherefore, utterly consume the flammable 
passions of me who cry out: Praised and supremely glorious is the God of our 
fathers! 
Deliver me from fiery torment, О God, through the supplications of Thy 
glorious dis­ciples; and turn not Thy face away from me, О Lord, for I cry out in 
repentance: Praised and supremely glorious is the God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: О Lord, Who wast born of the Virgin Mother of God without 
corruption, rescue me from corrupting sins and the passions, granting 
incorruption unto all who chant in hymns: Praised and supremely glorious is the 
God of our fathers! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither 
touched nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a 
single mouth * Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.' 
By thy loving supplication, О wise Nicholas, keep the feet of my soul from 
stumbling, setting them firmly upon the rock of God’s all-radiant commandments, 
and keeping me un­affected by the pernicious wiles of the enemy, the author of 
evil. 
Ask for us release from our many sins, from the snares of life and necessity, 
and from all the temptations which assail us, О sacred Nicholas, helper of all the 
faithful and foundation of holy hierarchs. 
I am the wicked servant who hid the talent which I right readily received to 
invest, and I fear the coming trial. But through the supplications of the holy 
Nicholas, may God, the Judge of all, not condemn me there. 
Theotokion: Thee, О all-holy, most holy one, do we, thy servants, ever 
beseech, day and night, with contrite mind, asking that deliverance from our sins 
be granted us through thy supplications, О pure one. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone 
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: 
Bless the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
The great Sun shone you forth like rays upon the whole world, О apostles, 
illumining those who sing with faith: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! (Twice) 
As reason-endowed shepherds, as sheep of the Shepherd, as lambs of Christ 
the Lamb, our Redeemer, О apostles who beheld God, unceasingly pray that He 
deliver me from the noetic wolf and grant me the portion of the saved. 
О all-accursed soul, groan and cry out to the Lord: I have sinned more than 
any other, and have wickedly committed iniquity! Cleanse and save me as Thou 
didst the harlot, the publican and the thief, О Compassionate One, through the 
right acceptable prayers of the apostles. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: With the angels, the apostles, the martyrs and prophets, О 
Mother of God, entreat Christ, that He save those who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Standing on the mountain of the godly virtues, by the showing forth of exalted 
miracles thou didst become known unto the ends of the earth, О Nicholas; 
wherefore, every tongue honoreth thee throughout all ages. 
Having tasted of divine sweetness, О venerable one, thou didst hate the 
bitterness of passions and pleasures. Deliver us from them, entreating Christ to 
put down the misfortunes that assail us. 
As the unshakable pillar and confirmation of the faithful, О all-blessed 
Nicholas, by thy supplications strengthen me who am ever shaken by the evils of 
life and the inspirations of the demons. 
Theotokion: О most pure one who hast given birth to the Physician of all, 
cure thou the passions of my heart, and, entreating Christ, О Virgin, show me to 
share in the lot of the righteous. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * 
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may 
unceasingly magnify Thee. 
Ye were shown to be divine and radiant lamps of the Holy Spirit, О blessed 
ones, and by the splendor of your honorable and most wise preaching ye 
illumined the whole world, driving away the darkness of the idols. (Twice) 
As branches of the divine, noetic vine, ye produced the divine grapes which 
pour forth the wine of salvation, О glorious apostles. Wherefore, deliver me from 
the drunkenness of pleasures. 
I tremble, wretch that I am, when I consider Thy dread judgment, О Christ; 
for I am now clad in shameful and foul deeds, and am condemned even before 
trial. Wherefore, through the supplications of Thine apostles have pity on me. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Theotokion: Thou alone didst deify mankind when thou didst give birth to the 
incarnate Word. Him do thou entreat with the apostles and martyrs, О most pure 
and all-immaculate Virgin, on behalf of us who bless and honor thee with faith. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of 
all descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom 
He was incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as 
the pure Mother of God.  
With sacred hymns, О father, we praise thee as a holy hierarch of Christ, the 
radiant star, the performer of miracles, the well-spring of healings, the helper of 
those amid sorrows, the most fervent deliverer of those who call upon thee in 
troubles. 
We earnestly beseech thee, О Nicholas, the great shepherd and emulator of 
Christ, the Chief Shepherd, in all things: From the sacred heights shepherd thy 
servants, and deliver them ever from all the perils of life. 
The end is already nigh! Wherefore art thou slothful, О my soul? Why dost 
thou not strive to live a life pleasing unto God? Hasten thou, and arise henceforth, 
and cry aloud: Have mercy upon me, О Lover of mankind, directing my life 
through the supplications of Nicholas, in that Thou art good! 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, who hast given birth to the divine Light, 
enlighten me who am darkened by all the assaults of the evil one, for I dwell in 
despondency, and anger God; and guide me to good works, in that thou art the 
cause of all good things. 
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the apostles, in Tone I: 
О glorious apostles, who enlightened the whole world, ever entreat God, that 
our souls may be saved. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Together let us praise Peter and Paul, Luke and Matthew, Mark and John, 
Andrew and Thomas, Bartholomew and Simon the Canaanite, James and Philip; 
and let us laud the whole choir of the disciples, as is meet. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Rejoice in the Lord, О ye martyrs, for ye fought the good 
fight: ye opposed emperors and vanquished tyrants; ye were not daunted by fire 
and the sword, nor by the wild beasts who devoured your bodies, but, sending up 
hymnody to Christ with the angels, ye received crowns from heaven. Ask that He 
grant peace to the world and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, О Virgin Theotokos! Rejoice, boast of the whole world! Rejoice, О 
most pure and blessed Mother of God! 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone I: 
By food the enemy led Adam out of paradise, but by the Cross Christ led back 
into it the thief who cried out: Remember me, О Lord, when Thou comest in Thy 
kingdom! 
Enlightening the ends of the earth with the divine rays of your teachings, ye 
destroyed the darkness of cruel ungodliness; and having come to the never-waning 
Light, ye are ever called blessed. 
Possessed of the hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, Who maketh all of you 
wise, О disciples of Christ, with the foolishness of your preaching ye made the 
world wise and brought it to the knowledge of God. 
To the martyrs: Enduring tortures as though ye were bodiless, О spiritual 
athletes of Christ, ye mightily vanquished all the incorporeal foe; wherefore, ye are 
rightly called blessed forever, О all-praised ones. 
Glory ..., О ye faithful, let us worship the Trinity; the Father, the Son and the 
upright Spirit, the indivisible, undivided and co-enthroned Unity; and let us cry 
out: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, О most adored Trinity! 
Both now ..., We bless thee, О most pure one, as thou didst foretell, for thou 
hast given birth to God in the flesh, whom the choir of the apostles preached. 
With them ask for us release from our transgressions, О all-hymned one. 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
