--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING: TONE I 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised, martyrs ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
The triumphal solemnity of the martyrs drowned a multitude of the demons in 
the streams of their blood, caused all the abominable sacrifices to cease, and set at 
naught the deception of the idols, for they suffered patiently. And they now 
entreat Christ to grant our souls peace and great mercy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
With wise words and doctrines the most sacred pastors taught all to glorify the 
threefold Godhead in Unity, divinely avoiding the commingling and division of Its 
Hypostases; and they now pray that peace and great mercy be granted our souls. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
The company of the venerable lulled carnal desires to sleep and restrained 
their onslaughts, showing their life to be angelic; wherefore, they now join chorus 
in the habitations of heaven, entreating Christ to grant our souls peace and great 
mercy. 
Then these other Stichera, of the martyrs, in the same tone: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
By the prayers, O Lord, of all the saints and of the Theotokos, grant us. Thy 
peace and have mercy upon us, for Thou alone art compassionate.  
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
The confession of faith that ye made at the tribunal, O ye saints, set at naught 
the strength of the demons, and set men free from error. As ye were beheaded ye 
cried aloud: “May the sacrifice of our lives be acceptable in Thy sight, O Lord; for, 
desiring Thee the Lover of mankind, we have spurned this quickly passing life.” 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Wise was the trade that ye made, O saints! Giving your blood, and inheriting 
heaven as your reward; Having suffered tribulation for a time, ye now rejoice 
eternally. Truly wisely have ye traded: forsaking things corruptible, ye have 
received things incorruptible; and rejoicing with the choirs of angels ye now hymn 
eternally the praises of the consubstantial Trinity. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the same tone: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and 
who gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn 
of the Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been 
revealed as the Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle 
wall, she hath brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore, 
holding fast to her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion 
the Lord born from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of 
God; ** for as the Invincible one he shall conquer our adversaries. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise up 
against me redeem me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
O all-famed martyrs, the earth did not hide you, but heaven hath received you; 
the gates of Paradise were opened to you, and entering within ye have partaken of 
the tree of life. Pray ye to Christ that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
For the reposed: What sweet-pleasure in this life remaineth untouched by 
grief? What glory endureth unchanged upon the earth? All is feebler than a 
shadow, more deceptive than a dream; for death in a single moment taketh away 
all these things. But in the light of Thy countenance, O Christ, and in the 
enjoyment of Thy beauty, grant rest to those whom Thou hast chosen, for Thou 
art the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: There is none free from sin, save Thou, O immortal One. 
Wherefore, by Thy loving-kindness, in that Thou art a compassionate God, grant 
unto Thy servants a dwelling-place in the Light, with the choirs of Thine angels, 
and overlooking their transgressions, grant them forgiveness. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Truly wondrous beyond understanding * are the mighty works of thy 
birthgiving O Bride of God, * which all the prophets proclaimed, * and thy 
conception and birth giving are most glorious, * O all-hymned one, * whereby 
thine Offspring hath incomprehensibly and ineffably saved the world, ** in that 
He is full of loving-kindness.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY NIGHT: TONE I 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos  
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He 
hath been glorified.  
Thou art a haven of salvation and protection for those who call upon thee, О 
most pure Theotokos. Wherefore, I fervently cry out to thee from the depths of 
my soul: О Lady, save me! 
O most pure Mary, Mother of the Creator, in that thou art good and easy to 
reconcile, heal thou my lowly soul which hath been corrupted by the passions and 
transgressions. 
Glory ..., О Lady unwedded, cease thou never to entreat my Creator and God 
on behalf of one who ever flees to thy protection, that I may receive mercy. 
Both now ..., О animate palace and fiery throne of the King, with the holy 
martyrs and apostles do thou ever entreat Christ, that He deliver us from perils. 
ODE III 
Irmos: The stone which the builders have rejected, * the same hath become 
the cornerstone: * this is the rock upon which Christ hath established the 
Church, * which He hath redeemed from among the nations. 
The darkness of transgressions surroundeth my heart, О Lady, and I dare not 
lift up mine eyes to heaven. Wherefore, I cry: Enlighten my mind, soul and heart 
with the precepts of Christ! 
I gaze upon thy divine image, and I honor thee, the seal of the Master, the 
most pure Mother, as the prototype. And I kiss it, and bow down, and praise it, 
knowing thine honor and His alone. 
Glory ..., Halt the cruel assaults of the body, and quench thou the flame of the 
passions, О Virgin, wherewith the cruel serpent weaves greatly tangled bonds 
offenses round about me, desiring to drag me down to destruction. 
Both now ..., Issuing forth bodily, the Word clothed Himself wholly in Adam 
through thee. Him do thou therefore beseech, that He deliver us from the 
passions, from divers perils and everlasting fire. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Foreseeing in the Spirit O prophet Habbakuk, * the incarnation of 
the Word, * thou didst proclaim, crying aloud: * When the years draw nigh, 
Thou shalt be known; * when the season cometh, Thou shalt be shown 
forth! * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having given birth to the Creator and Fashioner of all, О Virgin, thou hast 
ineffable power and invincible might, and savest those who approach thee with 
faith. Wherefore, I cry to thee: О Sovereign Lady of the world, help me! 
Set at naught the battles of the invisible and noetic foe who assail in vain my 
wretched heart, О Lady, and grant me divine serenity and peace, that I may hymn 
thee in gladness. 
Glory ..., Thou art the hope of the hopeless, helper of the poor, consolation of 
those who weep, cleansing of the sinful, guide of the lost, healer of the sick and 
righting of the fallen. 
Both now ..., О pure and blessed Virgin Mary, who alone hast done away with 
the curse of all; with the apostles, martyrs and prophets entreat Him Who issued 
forth from thy womb, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Grant us Thy peace, O Son of God, * for we know no other God 
than Thee, * and we call upon Thy Name, * for Thou art the God of the 
living and the dead. 
Save me from the abyss of perils, tribulations, griefs and bodily passions, О 
Lady, and preserve my soul in divine tranquility. 
Thou art my fervent and steadfast preservation all throughout my life, О most 
immaculate one. Wherefore, I beseech thee; even after my death, extend unto me 
thy rich loving-kindness. 
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to the Creator and Redeemer of all, 
deliver me from the bodily passions which consume my heart and drag me into 
unseemly deeds. 
Both now ..., In that thou hast been revealed to be a place of noetic sanctity, О 
Virgin Lady, wholly sanctify me, and with the holy and wise apostles pray that I be 
saved. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Emulating the prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  
Thou preservest me alive, delivering me from dangers. In thy loving-kindness 
do thou also stand before me when I depart this earth for life everlasting, О 
Virgin Mother. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou art an indestructible rampart, thou art a firm wall of protection, thou art 
a mighty intercessor for thy servant, О good Theotokos; wherefore, I ever call 
upon thee. 
Glory ..., Having acquired powerful supplications before God, О good 
Theotokos, disdain not me who fervently flee to thy protection and cry aloud: 
Have mercy on me, О Mother of the God of all! 
Both now ..., Reject me not, neither spurn me, О Savior, for the ewe-lamb 
who gave Thee birth in the flesh entreateth Thee with Thine apostles, prophets 
and passion-bearers. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
О most pure maiden, the prophets foretold thee as the cloud of the eternal 
light of God, the ark, the candlestand and jar, and the unquarried mountain; for in 
the latter times Christ our God came forth from thee without seed, as was the 
Father’s good pleasure. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither 
touched nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a 
single mouth * Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.' 
Hastening in thy loving-kindness, О most pure Lady, deliver me, who am 
brought to despondency by transgressions and the pleasures of the flesh and who 
am thrust into the abyss of destruction, О pure one. 
О Theotokos, thou art the refuge and mighty protection of all the faithful. Be 
thou for me a guide to the Creator, granting me deliverance from transgressions in 
thy compassion. 
Glory ..., Thou hast destroyed the curse, О pure one who hast given birth to 
Christ our joy. By thy power, О most immaculate one, break thou also the curse 
which I have incurred through sin, and grant me joy. 
Both now ..., О most holy and pure one, thy servants ever entreat thee day and 
night, praying with contrite thoughts. Grant us deliverance from our offenses by 
thy supplications. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Arise, go forth and do battle against the enemies who trouble and oppress us 
in vain, delivering us by thy power, О holy virgin, thou helper of the world! 
Thou hast saved the world from death and corruption by thy divine 
birthgiving, О good Virgin; and now, by thy supplications, rescue from the 
passions and save us who praise thee. 
Glory ..., Great and ineffable is thy might, О Virgin, and many and invincible 
are thy divine compassions and loving-kindness. Wherefore, save us who call 
upon thee in truth. 
Both now ..., As an animate vine, О Virgin, thou didst put forth for us the ripe 
Cluster, Who hath poured forth the wine of remission and dried up the 
drunkenness of sin. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The light-bearing cloud upon whom * the beginningless Master of 
all descended from heaven, * like the dew upon the fleece, * and of whom 
He was incarnate, * becoming a man for our sake, * let us all magnify as 
the pure Mother of God.  
Greatly tempest-tossed upon the sea of life by carnal pleasures, I fall down 
before thee and cry aloud: Have mercy on me, who flee unto thee, О Lady, and 
extend to me a hand of salvation, delivering me from the abyss of destruction! 
To thee do I confess my sins, О Virgin; before thy face do I disclose my 
shame; and I cry to thee from the depths of my soul “Have mercy and take pity, 
О most pure one, for on thee and God have I set my firm hope”! 
Glory ..., With all my soul I call upon thee who hast given birth without seed 
to the Creator and Master, and I cry out earnestly: Save me from the corruption of 
manifold transgressions, and deliver me from the unquenchable fire, О most holy 
and good Theotokos! 
Both now ..., О pure one, thou impassable door, gate of paradise, path of the 
saved, way of salvation: with the martyrs and prophets, the righteous and 
venerable, and the divine apostles, pray thou, that our souls be saved. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
О Lord, the glorious passion-bearers were invested by Thee with the boast of 
suffering and the dignity of crowns; for by enduring wounds they vanquished the 
iniquitous, and by divine power they received victory from heaven. Through their 
supplications free me also from the invisible foe, О Savior, and save me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
As valiant warriors, believing with oneness of mind, ye were undaunted by the 
threats of the tyrants, О holy ones. Eagerly coming to Christ, and taking up the 
precious Cross, ye finished the race and received victory from heaven. Glory be to 
Him Who strengthened you! Glory be to Him Who crowned you! Glory be to 
Him Who through you worketh healings for all! 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Spec. Mel.: “Thy tomb, О Savior ...”:  
For the reposed: In a place of light, among the choir of the righteous, do Thou 
grant rest unto those who have passed over to Thee, О Savior; for they placed 
their trust in Thee, О Lover of mankind. Accept our supplication for our fathers 
and children, whose memory we keep, and grant them justification, in that Thou 
art abundantly merciful. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all 
became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous 
David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having 
borne thy Creator. * Glory be to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory 
be to Him Who came forth from thee! ** Glory be to Him Who hath set us free 
by thy birthgiving. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone I: 
Accept in supplication, O Lord and Lover of mankind, the sufferings that the 
saints endured for Thee; and, we beseech Thee, heal all our suffering. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Let us all pray to the martyrs of Christ, for they intercede for our salvation. Let 
us all draw near to them with love, for they pour forth the grace of healing, and as 
guardians of the faith they drive away the hosts of demons. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
For the reposed: Abolishing the dominion of death, О Christ, Thou didst pour 
forth incorruption upon mortals; for those who believe on Thee do not die, but 
abide continually in Thee. Wherefore, grant rest to the souls of Thy servants, О 
Lord, and number them among Thy saints, granting them forgiveness and resur-
rection by the prayers of the Theotokos. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Virgin Theotokos, who alone art the mighty and fervent intercessor for the 
human race, with the prophets, martyrs and holy hierarchs, the fasters and the 
venerable, unceasingly entreat God the Word, to Whom thou hast given birth in a 
manner transcending nature, that He save us all.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, hierarchs, the venerable, and the departed, the 
acrostic whereof is “I sing a divine hymn unto those beloved, of God,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone I: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Guiding Israel with a pillar of fire and cloud, * as God He divided 
the sea * and engulfed the chariots of Pharaoh in the deep. * Let us chant a 
hymn of victory, * for He alone hath been glorified!  
Protected by the shield of piety, the godly spiritual athletes went forth to do 
battle; and they destroyed all the power of the enemy, chanting a hymn of victory 
unto Christ, Who strengthened them. 
Ye tended the flock of God on the mystical pasture, О divine shepherds, 
driving away the wolves with the staff of your sacred words; and ye made your 
abode, rejoicing, in the fold of heaven, where the great Shepherd is. 
О ye who by fasting and pangs mortified the flesh, at the behest of God ye live 
even after death, О venerable ones. Ever entreat Christ, Who died for our souls, 
that He have compassion upon us. 
For the reposed: When Thou didst die, Thou gavest unto the dead Thy divine 
and immortal life. Give those who with faith have passed from this corrupt life a 
share in Thy kingdom, in that Thou art compassionate and alone art greatly 
merciful. 
Theotokion: The martyrs who were wounded with the love of Christ, the 
women who were crowned by God, and all the venerable honor thee, who art 
good and all-immaculate among women, as the all-honored Queen; and they 
rejoice with faith. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Another canon, of the departed, we chant when there is no Menaion, the 
acrostic whereof is “With faith I offer a first hymnody unto those who 
have fallen asleep,” in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it 
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the 
deep.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: By Thy death thou didst break the gates and bars of death, О 
Immortal One. Open the gates of immortality which transcend understanding, О 
Master, unto those who have fallen asleep, through the supplications of Thy 
passion-bearers. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: That we might be granted divine life, Thou didst descend 
unto death, and having looted its strongholds, Thou didst lead us up there-from; 
and now, О Bestower of life, give rest to those who have departed unto Thee. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Assuming my corrupt and dead body, Thou didst 
invest it with incorruption, and didst bear it unto endless and blessed life. There 
do Thou grant rest unto those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: О ye faithful, let us hymn her who through God 
gave birth to God the Word, for she, the all-pure one, hath become the path of 
life for those who have died. Let us glorify her as the God-receiver and 
Theotokos. 
ODE III 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Let my heart be established in Thy will O Christ God, * Who hath 
established a second heaven over the waters, * and founded the earth upon 
the waters, * O all-powerful One. 
Having endured many torments, ye have been deemed worthy of many good 
things, О sacred multitude of martyrs; wherefore, by your supplications cleanse 
me of the incalculable multitude of mine evils. 
The sacred ones, having been clothed in the grace of righteousness, and the 
council of the venerable, having acquired gladness and beauty, made themselves 
like unto the immaterial ministers. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О ye prophets of Christ, ye divine martyrs, ye company of sacred women who 
suffered manfully, ye have been glorified in asceticism. By their supplications, О 
Savior, grant Thy mercies unto all. 
For the reposed: О Christ Who of Thine own will and with Thine own hand 
fashioned man out of the earth, grant the good things of heaven unto all Thy 
servants who have departed from us with faith. 
Theotokion: О Birthgiver of God who knewest not wedlock, bear the 
petitions of all unto God our Creator, Who was born from thy womb, that we 
may obtain complete deliverance from our evils. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: In that Thou alone art good, in that Thou alone art greatly 
merciful, unto those who in piety have departed unto Thee grant rest in the 
mansions of heaven, where gladness and delight abide, and where the council of 
the martyrs rejoiceth. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: Thou alone hast appeared on the earth, О my sinless Savior 
Who takest away the sins of the world, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness. In 
the courts of Thy saints, in the sweetness of paradise, grant rest unto the souls of 
those who have departed this world in faith, О Lover of mankind. 
For the reposed: Casting down the dominion of death, О Master, Thou didst 
pour forth endless life unto all the faithful; therein do Thou number those who 
have departed, overlooking their immeasurable transgressions, and forgiving their 
sins, О Lover of mankind. 
Theotokion: Conceived without seed, О pure one, the eternal Word came to 
us in the flesh, destroying the might of death, and granting resurrection and 
everlasting life unto the dead in His tender compassion. 
ODE IV 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I have glorified Thy might, * thus said the 
prophet. 
О martyrs who withstood every wound with valiant resolve, ye brought 
yourselves as un­blemished lambs unto Christ, the Life Who was sacrificed for all. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Taught by the word of God, the holy hierarchs became divine mouths, and 
delivered men’s souls from the mouth of the deceiver. And we honor them with 
pious intent. 
Mighty in the divine Spirit, О godly fathers, by grace ye mightily vanquished 
the spirits of evil, О venerable ones. 
For the reposed: Having willingly died upon the Tree, О Lover of mankind, 
grant life everlasting unto those who have passed on to Thee with faith. 
Theotokion: The choir of women who suffered manfully did not deny the 
Lord, nor were the saints overwhelmed by the pleasures of the body, for they had 
thee as an ally, О most pure one. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain 
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy 
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and 
restoration. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Slaying Hades with Thine invincible power, Thou wast 
reckoned among the dead, О Christ Who alone art free among the dead. Through 
the entreaties of the holy martyrs, free the souls of the pious from damnation 
there. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: As Master of all, Thou didst offer Thy sacrifice as a 
deliverance and ransom to annul the curse of Adam; wherefore, we beseech Thy 
compassions: Give rest unto those who have departed, granting them remission 
offenses. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Thou didst receive a place in the grave, О my 
Savior, and as God didst raise up the dead condemned to abide in the graves. 
grant eternal life now unto the departed, in that Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: The race of mankind was saved by thy birthgiving; 
for unto us thou hast given birth to hypostatic Life, the destruction of death, Who 
giveth access unto life, О most immaculate Lady, Birthgiver of God. 
ODE V 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Shine forth thy radiant and everlasting light * upon us who rise early 
at dawn, * unto the judgments of Thy commandments, * O Master, Lover 
of mankind, * Christ our God.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Armed with piety, ye were revealed to be un-wounded by the arrows of the 
foe, О martyrs, and having become victors through grace, ye have received 
crowns. 
The Lord hath anointed with divine oil His priests who have shepherded 
multitudes of the faithful in holiness and have led them to the fold of heaven. 
О most sacred hieromartyrs, all ye venerable, who kept the laws of the Spirit 
and came to share in the kingdom, ye have been divinely glorified. 
For the reposed: О Master and Lord, unto those whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself at Thy command, grant Thy kingdom with the saints, overlooking their 
ancient offenses. 
Theotokion: The women who found glory through asceticism and suffering 
destroyed the dominion of the serpent, having thee as an intercessor, О most pure 
one. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * enlighten 
with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those who with right 
worship hymn Thee.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Thou didst accept death, countering the venom of death, and 
breaking the sting of mortality. Do Thou Thyself grant rest unto those Thou hast 
taken to Thyself, О Bestower of life, through the prayers of the martyrs. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: О Thou Who didst free mankind from mortality and 
corruption, the souls of those who have departed in faith do Thou cause to dwell 
in the courts of Thy saints, from whence all sorrow hath fled, and where gladness 
abideth. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Thou didst open paradise unto him who was 
suspended with Thee, О Master. Accept now the souls who have departed unto 
Thee with faith, granting that they may dwell in the Church of the firstborn. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Delivering the dominion of those who trust in thee, 
steer them calmly into the harbor of the will of God by thy maternal boldness 
toward thy Son, О blessed and all-immaculate one. 
ODE VI 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Emulating the prophet Jonah, I cry aloud: * Free Thou my life from 
corruption, O good One; * and save me who crieth out: * O Savior of the 
world, Glory be to Thee!  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Slain through the infliction of many wounds, ye have inherited true life 
together, praying that all of us may be saved, О holy martyrs. 
Known on earth as radiant morning-stars, ye illumined the faithful with the 
light of piety, О most glorious sword-bearers of Christ, ye most wise and holy 
hierarchs. 
Ye were shown to be sojourners on the earth and citizens of heaven, О God-
bearing fasters, who mortified carnal-mindedness by asceticism and humility. 
For the reposed: О Lover of mankind, show forth the faithful, whom Thou 
hast taken to Thyself, as sharers in Thy never-waning light and in true delight; and 
reckon them among the council of the saints. 
Theotokion: Those who suffered mightily and fasted ardently have been led to 
Christ, the King of all by thee, in thy entourage, as saith the psalm, О all-hymned 
Birthgiver of God. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to 
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save 
Thy people O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the 
weak. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: In that Thou art full of tender compassion, grant forgiveness 
of transgressions unto the departed, bestowing upon them the everlasting delight 
where the radiance of Thy countenance shines, illumining Thy passion-bearers. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: О Christ Who hast redeemed the world by the Blood which 
flowed from Thy side, by Thy precious sufferings deliver those who have fallen 
asleep in faith, for Thou didst offer Thyself as a ransom for all mankind. 
For the reposed: О Thou Who of old fashioned me with Thy most pure hands 
and gave me a spirit, and most beautifully restored me who had grievously fallen: 
Do Thou Thyself grant rest unto the souls of the departed. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Grant, О Lord, that those who have fallen asleep in 
faith in Thee may dwell in Thy radiant bridal-chamber, and overlook their 
transgressions, in that Thou art good, and full of loving-kindness, and greatly 
merciful. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: We hymn thee, О blessed and pure one, for because 
of thee the never-setting Sun of righteousness hath shone forth upon us who are 
in darkness and the shadow of death; for thou hast become the mediatress of our 
salvation. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Thy children who were in the furnace O Savior, * were neither 
touched nor troubled by The fire. * Whereupon the three sang, as with a 
single mouth * Thy praises and blessed Thee, saying: * 'O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.' 
Tried by all manner of tortures like gold in the fire, in the love of God the 
martyrs were shown to be more lustrous than any gold, and were deposited in the 
treasuries of heaven. 
As priests, as ministers of God, О all ye sacred hierarchs, ye offered un-bloody 
sacrifices unto God; and having shepherded the people, ye have made your abode 
where the great Shepherd dwelleth. 
Refusing to submit to the passions of the flesh, and having clothed yourselves 
in dispassion as in a mystic robe, О venerable ones, ye were shown to dwell with 
the angels. By their supplications, О Christ, deliver us from temptations. 
For the reposed: Where there is mystical food, where the light of Thy 
countenance shines, О Christ, there through grace cause those who have departed 
from us in faith to dwell, that with piety they may glorify Thy goodness. 
Theotokion: The holy women, having thee, О all-holy and most pure one, as 
their adornment, joyfully join chorus with the angels and glorify God the Word 
Who in the flesh was born from thee in His great loving-kindness. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; 
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so 
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou 
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: О Christ, grant that those who have gone to Thee out of the 
tempest of the world may be illumined by the splendors of Thy most pure glory; 
and grant that with the martyrs they may cry unto Thee: Blessed art Thou, О 
praised God of our fathers! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: Thou wast truly the new Adam, О Creator of Adam, for 
Thou alone didst annul the curse of Adam. Wherefore, we pray to Thee: In the 
sweetness of paradise grant rest unto the departed, О Christ, in that Thou alone 
art full of loving-kindness. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Glory ..., For the reposed: О Christ Who, as the good and merciful God, alone 
knowest the weakness of our nature, cause all whom Thou hast taken to Thyself 
to dwell where the never-waning light of Thy countenance shines, О praised and 
most glorious God of our fathers. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Through thy birthgiving the tabernacle of the law 
and the ancient foreshadowings have passed away; for thou didst shine forth upon 
us the light of divine grace, whereby we have been delivered from our ancient 
debts, О pure one, hymning God Who is supremely glorious. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * as 
their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye peoples 
bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Most gloriously cooled by the fire of the divine Spirit, all the martyrs passed 
the mouths of the lions and the boiling of cauldrons unharmed. 
Having granted Thy prophets to foresee things afar off, in a sacred manner 
Thou didst make wise Thy holy hierarchs. Through their supplications, О Christ 
God, enlighten the hearts of those who hymn Thee with faith. 
О venerable ascetics, who crucified yourselves to the world, ye have inherited 
heavenly life with those who from all the ages pleased God in holiness and 
righteousness. 
For the reposed: О Thou Who as God didst fashion man from the earth, in 
that Thou art good Thou hast taken the faithful from the earth. Grant them the 
food of paradise, overlooking all things they have committed. 
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be manifestly good and immaculate among 
women, the women who suffered make entreaty with thee unto God, О pure 
Virgin, that thy servants may be saved from misfortunes. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone 
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: 
Bless the Lord all ye works of the Lord, * hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Having washed away all defilement from Thy departed 
servants with the dew of Thy love for mankind, grant them to hymn Thee with 
songs: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages! 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: Show forth the faithful whom Thou hast translated, О 
Savior, to be intercessors at Thy right hand, justifying them by the supplications of 
the passion-bearers, that they may chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Hymn and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Glory..., For the reposed: О Thou Who hast all authority over death and life, 
be Thou well-pleased that those who have fallen asleep in faith may receive Thine 
effulgence, and may cry: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! Hymn and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou wast for us the mediatress of salvation, О all-
immaculate one, and our sojourn in radiance for eons untold. Thee, О pure 
Virgin, do all of the works of the Lord, ever bless and supremely exalt throughout 
all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: The ever-flowing wellspring of life, * light-bearing candlestick of 
grace, * the animate temple, and most pure cloud, * wider than the heavens 
and the earth, * the Theotokos do we the faithful magnify. 
Rejoicing, let us honor the sacred contests of the sacred martyrs, the sufferings 
and wounds, nailings and banishments, and blessed sacrifice, whereby they were 
shown to be heirs of Christ. 
As priests of God the divine favorites were clothed in righteousness; for 
having lived in holiness those who manifestly reached the end of their life in 
fasting rejoice, magnifying Christ. 
As divine mouths of the Lord, all the prophets proclaimed beforehand His 
light unto all; and with them now rejoice the women who struggled mightily and 
pleased God by fasting. 
For the reposed: О Power Who reignest over all, those whom Thou hast taken 
from the earth do Thou show to share with Thy saints in Thy kingdom; and in 
Thine all-great goodness, О God of all, overlook the things they have committed. 
Theotokion: О thou who hast given birth to the divine and timeless Light, 
remit all my transgressions in time by thy prayers; and enlighten my mind, which 
is ever darkened by slothfulness, that I may hymn and magnify thee with faith. 
Canon of the reposed 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * 
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may 
unceasingly magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: In that Thou art a merciful God Who lovest mankind, have 
pity on Thy creation, and grant rest in the habitations of Thy saints unto those 
who have departed, where all the martyrs rejoice, О greatly Merciful One. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: О Lover of mankind, as Thou art possessed of an abyss of 
mercies which overwhelmeth the transgressions of Thy servants, receive those 
whom Thou hast chosen, giving rest to them in the bosom of Abraham, and 
granting them to dwell with Lazarus in Thy light. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: As the Redeemer and Savior of the race of mankind, 
for the sake of Thy crucifixion grant divine sweetness, life incorruptible, gladness 
and radiance unto those whom Thou hast now taken from among us, as our 
Benefactor. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: О thy wonders which transcend understanding! For 
thou alone, О Virgin, hast granted all under the heavens to understand the newest 
miracle of thine incomprehensible birthgiving. Wherefore, we all magnify thee, О 
most pure one. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
On the Praises, these Stichera of the martyrs, in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the martyrs: Come, all ye peoples, and with hymns and spiritual odes let us 
honour the passion-bearers of Christ, the luminaries of the world and preachers of 
the faith, the ever-flowing fountain from whence poureth forth healing upon the 
faithful. By their prayers, O Christ our God, grant peace to Thy world, and to our 
souls great mercy. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
These are the warriors of the mighty King, who opposed the edicts of the 
tyrants and bravely scorned all tortures. Trampling every delusion underfoot, they 
have been crowned as is meet: and they entreat Thee O Savior that peace be 
granted to Thy world, and great mercy upon our souls. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
O all-famed martyrs, neither tribulation nor oppression, nor hunger, neither 
scourging, nor the fury of wild beasts nor the sword, nor the threat of fire, could 
separate you from God. But suffering out of love for Him, as though in others’ 
bodies, ye forgot your own nature and spurned death. Wherefore as is meet, ye 
received the reward of your pangs, inheriting the heavenly Kingdom. Pray ye on 
behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye martyrs, for ye have fought the good fight. Ye 
resisted emperors and vanquished tyrants; ye feared neither fire nor the sword, 
nor the wild beasts that devoured your bodies. But, sending up hymnody with the 
angels to Christ, ye received crowns from heaven. Pray ye that peace be granted to 
the world, and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., 
For the reposed: In very deed O my Savior, Thou hast revealed Thyself to be 
the resurrection of all; for by Thy word Thou didst raise Lazarus from the dead, O 
Word. And when the dead arose from the graves, and the gates of Hades were 
shattered, Thou didst reveal the death of man, to be but sleep. O Thou Who came 
to save, and not judge, Thy creature: grant rest in Thy loving compassion to those 
whom Thou hast chosen. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O holy Virgin Theotokos * who art one of us, * thou pure vessel of all 
the world, * inextinguishable lamp, * dwelling-place of the Boundless One, * 
indestructible temple! * Rejoice, thou from whom the Lamb of God was born, ** 
who taketh away the sins of all the world.  
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the departed, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone I:  
Spec. Mel.: “O all-praised martyrs ...”: 
We entreat Thee, О Savior: Grant Thy sweet fellowship unto those who have 
fallen asleep, and by Thy loving-kindness cause them to dwell with Thy saints in 
the habitations of the righteous and the abodes of heaven, overlooking their 
iniquities and granting them rest. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
Transcending things visible, О Savior, are Thy promises, which eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, and which have never entered the heart of man. We beseech 
Thee, О Master: Grant that those who have passed over to Thee may receive Thy 
sweet fellowship; and life everlasting. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Rejoicing in Thy Cross and setting their hope thereon, Thy servants have 
passed over to Thee, О Thou Lover of mankind. Grant them now deliverance 
from their transgressions, by Thy Cross, and the Blood which Thou didst shed for 
the life of the world, forgiving them their offenses in Thy kindheartedness, and 
illumining them with the light of Thy countenance. 
Verse: Their memorial * is from generation to generation. 
There is none free from sin, save Thou, O immortal One. Wherefore, by Thy 
loving-kindness, in that Thou art a compassionate God, grant unto Thy servants a 
dwelling-place in the Light, with the choirs of Thine angels, and overlooking their 
transgressions, grant them forgiveness. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Pray to Christ Thy Child, O Virgin Mother, * that He may grant to Thy 
servants forgiveness of sins, * who with a proper faith in the dogmas of the 
Church * proclaim thee to be the Theotokos; * and may He deem them worthy ** 
of the radiance and glory of the saints in His Kingdom. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT THE LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone I: 
By food the enemy led Adam out of paradise, but by the Cross Christ led back 
into it the thief who cried out: Remember me, О Lord, when Thou comest in Thy 
kingdom! 
The countless multitude of Thy spiritual athletes: the holy hierarchs, the most 
wise women and the most glorious prophets; entreat Thee, О Jesus our God: 
Grant us remission of transgressions, and great mercy. 
О most sacred spiritual athletes of Christ, who have finished your race, with 
the sacred hierarchs and prophets ye have been deemed worthy to dwell in the 
heavenly city, rejoicing with the angels. 
О Christ, in never-waning light settle those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, 
overlooking their transgressions, in that Thou art the compassionate God, that we 
may glorify Thine incalculable mercy, О Benefactor. 
Glory..., We worship the Father, we glorify the Son, and all of us, the faithful, 
hymn the most holy Spirit. Remember us who cry to Thee, О God the 
consubstantial Trinity and Unity. 
Both now ..., We hymn thee, О pure one, as the spacious palace, the throne of 
glory and the cloud of light; and we pray: Dispel the gloomy cloud from our souls 
by thy divine supplications. 
 
On Saturday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, * O ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
And for the Departed, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
 Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
 Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
Another, for the departed: 
Communion Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to 
Thyself, O Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
