--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE II 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have, cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Possessing a wellspring of loving-kindness, * and ever pouring forth Thy 
mercy from the depths thereof, * О supremely good Father, * Son and Word of 
the Father, and Holy Spirit, * Thou uncreated Essence: * Accept our supplication 
and prayer, * and grant forgiveness unto all who abide in transgressions, * in that 
Thou art a compassionate God ** and lovest mankind. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Having by nature unfathomable depths of compassion, * mercy and goodness; 
* we beseech Thee, О Christ our Savior, * falling down before Thee, crying, and 
ever calling out to Thee: * Grant unto Thy servants * remission of their many 
transgressions * and forgiveness of all things wherein they have offended, * in that 
Thou art a compassionate God ** and lovest mankind. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
As God and the Savior of all, * desiring to save us for whose sake Thou didst 
assume flesh, * and manifest Thyself as a man. * Do Thou Save us who bow 
down before Thy commandments, О Lover of mankind, * for Thou didst not 
come to save the righteous, * but through the grace of divine baptism, * Thou 
didst come to loose us who are bound by the chains * of the multitude of our sins 
and transgressions, ** in that Thou art a compassionate God and lovest mankind. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the incorporeal hosts, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
The thrones, cherubim and seraphim, * the dominions and powers, * and the 
honorable authorities, * and with them the angels, archangels and principalities, * 
together chant unceasing hymns unto Him * Who fashioned their incorruptible 
essence, * teaching all to worship in Trinity * the One Being Who is conjoined, 
equal in honor, ** and co-enthroned. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
The primary choirs * of the immaterial beings, * directly emitting the effulgent 
rays of the Godhead, * proclaim in their ranks * the divine radiance unto the rest; 
* and impart these to us through the law of love, * and likewise by dignity, * unto 
each according to his yearning ** for purity of heart. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Lifting up the heart’s eye of our soul * within our souls, * we ever stretch forth 
the yearnings of our mind with divine love, * that, illumined by the rays emitted 
thereby, * we may escape the darkness of the passions, * hoping that we may 
stand with the angels * before the dread throne of the Creator, ** and be 
transformed from light to light. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With thrice-holy voices, О most pure one, * the multitude of thy Son's angels 
hymn thee, * who art ever His fiery throne, * animate palace, and divine bridge * 
leading to Him from the earth. * And together with the Archangel Gabriel * they 
cry out to thee: * Rejoice, О joyous one, ** for thou hast given birth to the Source 
of joy! 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 
our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone II: 
Like the prodigal son I have sinned against Thee, О Savior. Accept me who 
am penitent, О Father. Have mercy on me, О God! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
With the cry of the publican I cry out to Thee, О Christ my Savior: Cleanse me 
as Thou didst him, and have mercy on me, О God! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
To the martyrs: Having hated the pleasures of the earth, the passion-bearers 
were granted the good things of heaven and became fellow citizens with the 
angels. By their supplications, О Lord, have mercy and save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, * thou indestructible and surpassingly holy 
temple; * as the prophet crieth out: ** Holy is thy temple, wondrous in 
righteousness!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
SUNDAY NIGHT: TONE II 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
Having taken our form from thee, the never-setting Sun manifestly showed 
thee forth as a noetic and most splendid heaven. Wherefore, deliver me from the 
stench of the passions, that with love I may hymn thee, the only Virgin Mother. 
I beseech thee, О Lady, who art the tongs which held the noetic Ember which 
hath purified human nature: Wash away the defilement of my manifold 
transgressions, and by thy supplications deliver me from defiling passions. 
Glory ..., О most pure Theotokos, who hast given birth to Christ, the 
Wellspring of mercy, and hast opened Eden to mankind: open unto me the 
portals of thy mercy, and grant me forgiveness offenses, О Sovereign Lady of the 
world. 
Both now ..., Rend asunder the bonds of my transgressions, О Ever-virgin 
Lady, entreating thy Son and God; and cast down sin which oppresseth me, that, 
saved, I may ever hymn thee, О most immaculate one. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I 
sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Dispel the gloom and darkness of my passions with the rays of thy 
supplications, and enlighten me, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to Christ, 
the never-setting Sun Who shone forth from the Sun before the morning-star. 
By thy birthgiving, О most pure one, thou hast restored the fallen and broken 
tabernacle of David thy father; wherefore, О Theotokos, raise me up, thy servant, 
who am crushed by transgressions and the passions. 
Glory ..., Be thou a sword, О Virgin, driving away the sins and passions of my 
soul, and show me to be another garden of paradise, preserved by thee un-
assailed, offering thee the flowers of the Spirit. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Stretching forth the hand of compassions, receive me, О 
Birthgiver of God, and from all condemnation rescue me who flee to thee, and 
falling down before thee, call upon thine aid. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly merciful One.  
Taking the leaven of human nature like dough, the Creator made it undefiled 
and holy; and washing me clean of the defilement of the passions, He hath 
cleansed me of the mire of my transgressions. 
With the remedy of thy prayers, as with bandages and oil, О pure Lady, heal 
now the stripes of my soul and the wounds of sin, in that thou hast given birth to 
the divine Healing of nature. 
Glory ..., Loose thou the bonds of my passions, О Lady, and cleave asunder 
the chains of my sins with the sword of thy prayers, О thou who hast given birth 
to Christ Who granteth deliverance to those bound in Hades. 
Both now ..., Cure thou the passions of my soul which most wretchedly 
shroud me in gloom, and enlighten my thoughts, О pure one, driving far away the 
darkness of the demons who oppress me and who lay traps for me all the day 
long. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness 
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with 
Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Thou hast delivered the world from the ancient curse, О Lady who hast given 
birth to Christ, the Blessing of the world. Deliver me from unseemly thoughts and 
from all grief, for thou alone art the joy of the faithful. 
A horde of demons surroundeth the city of my soul, striving mightily to take it 
captive. О most glorious Lady, thou city of the King of all, defend me by thy 
supplications as with entowered ramparts, and save me. 
Glory ..., The cruel storm of the sedition of the spirits of evil doth trouble my 
mind. Quickly anticipate my need, and still it, О thou who hast given birth to 
Christ, the only almighty Helmsman of all creation. 
Both now ..., О Birthgiver of God, shine the light of repentance upon me who 
am enclosed in the darkness of perdition. Give a helping hand to me who lie 
prostrate, and by thy supplications raise me up, О pure one, that I may 
accomplish the judgments of God. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
As thou hast given birth to Life everlasting, О most pure one, when my soul 
departeth from my body, slay death by thy supplications. 
The serpent who hates mankind pursues me, subjecting me to trials. О Lady, 
set him at naught, for thou hast given birth to Him Who crushed the heads of the 
serpents. 
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to Christ our God, the Way of life, to 
the straight path direct me who walk with faltering steps. 
Both now ..., Heal the sufferings of my soul and vanquish the perplexity of 
grief, О most pure one who hast given birth to God, for our salvation. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
As the wellspring of loving-kindness, О Theotokos, grant mercy unto us. Look 
upon the people who have sinned, and show forth, as ever, thy power; for, 
trusting in thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice!’’, as once did Gabriel, the supreme 
commander of the incorporeal beings. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The wise children did not adore the golden idol, * but went 
themselves into the flame and defied the pagan gods. * They prayed in the 
midst of the flame, * and an angel bedewed them saying: * ‘The prayer of 
your lips hath been heard’. 
The waves of the passions trouble my mind and shake my soul; yet, О Virgin 
who hast given birth to Him Who by His divine command restrained the raging 
sea, transport me to the tranquility of dispassion and halt the turmoil of my flesh. 
Knowing thee to be the gate of the noetic East who hast appeared from 
heaven, О Virgin. I, thy servant, pray that through thee I might enter into the 
heavens. Wherefore, accept me, О Lady, and guide me by thy light. 
Glory ..., Crucified on the Cross of His own will, Christ thy Son put the 
princes of darkness to shame and destroyed the corrupting power of death. 
Thereby, О most pure Lady, do thou slay the passion-plagued understanding of 
my flesh. 
Both now ..., Cease not, О pure one, to pray to God Who was born from thee, 
on behalf of those who approach thee with faith and ask deliverance, О only 
helper of the world, for thou art the hope and help of the despairing and the aid 
of those who are ever tempest-tossed amid evils. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, * 
beholding the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst 
of the flame: * Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
О Virgin, thou divinely made tabernacle of the Holy of holies, of Him Who 
set thee forth as the image of the ancient tabernacle, having the great High Priest 
in thy midst: Show my heart to be a holy tabernacle of the Most High: Christ, the 
King of all. 
Having borne, О Virgin, the divine ark and the tablets of the law: the most 
pure Word of God, Christ, thine uncircumscribable Son: by thy prayers, as with 
the finger of God, inscribe Him upon the surface of my soul. 
Glory ..., As from a mountain the precious Stone hath been cut from thy 
womb, О most immaculate Lady, and as the only Almighty One He hath broken 
the pillars of all falsehood. Thereby do thou now destroy the images of the 
passions of my soul, having broken the jaws of the noetic foe. 
Both now ..., With the waters of life, О Virgin Theotokos, water thou my heart 
which hath been seared by the flame of sin, ever preserving me in compunction, 
who chant with fear: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who 
through thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the 
Luminary Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the 
flesh.  
Thou didst shine forth Christ, the Sun of righteousness, О pure one, showing 
thyself to be a most radiant heaven. By thy supplications destroy the night of my 
passions, illumine my soul, and enlighten and make bright my heart. 
Condemn and trample underfoot mine adversary, О Theotokos, and deliver 
me from his oppression; for thou hast given birth to the Good and Righteous 
One Who resteth in the bosom of the Godhead and hath condemned death. 
Glory ..., He Who as God formed the essence of the incorporeal ones became 
incarnate from thee, О Virgin maiden. Wherefore, by thy supplications deliver me, 
thy servant, from the evil circumstances and the carnal understanding of the 
passions of the flesh. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., Thou hast done away with the grief of Eve, having given birth to 
the new Adam Who created the nature of the first Adam. Wherefore, erase also 
with the record of my transgressions, freeing me from perils, sorrows and the 
passions. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
And the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of compunction, in Tone II:  
Like the waves of the sea, mine iniquities have risen up against me, and I alone 
am floundering like a ship upon the deep, under the weight of many offenses; but 
steer me to the calm harbor of repentance, О God, and save me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
I am a barren tree, in nowise producing the fruit of repentance, О Lord; and I 
fear lest I be cut down, and am terrified of that unquenchable fire which is to 
come. Wherefore, I entreat Thee: Before those misfortunes, do Thou turn and 
save me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
As the well-spring of loving-kindness, О Theotokos, grant mercy unto us. 
Look upon the people who have sinned, and show forth, as ever, thy power; for, 
trusting in thee, we cry out to thee: Rejoice!’’, as once did Gabriel, the supreme 
commander of the incorporeal beings. 
 After the 2nd, chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II: 
“Have mercy on me,” said David; and I cry unto Thee: “I have sinned, О 
Savior! Cleanse me of my sins through repentance, and have mercy upon me!” 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
“Have mercy on me, О God, have mercy on me!” David wept over his two 
sins; and I cry out to Thee over my tens of thousands of transgressions. He made 
his bed moist with tears, but I shed nary a one. I am in despair, and pray: “Have 
mercy on me, О God, according to Thy great mercy!” 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Having as their vesture Thee Who dost clothe the sky with 
clouds, the saints endured torments in the world at the hands of the iniquitous, 
and set at naught the falsehood of the idols. By their supplications, О Savior, free 
us from the invisible foe, and save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We magnify thee, О Theotokos, crying aloud: Rejoice, О cloud of the never-
setting Sun, who didst bear the Lord of glory within thy womb! 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “As a wellspring of loving-kindness ...”: 
Sinning in ignorance and in knowledge, night and day, I, alone on the earth, 
anger Thee by mine iniquities, О Christ. О good One, Who alone art sinless, and 
Who in Thy tender compassion hast come to call sinners to repentance, save me 
by the prayers of Thine angels. 
The most holy choirs of the incorporeal ones beseech Thee, the good Master, 
to have pity at the hour of judgment, that; from bitter torment, the malice of the 
demons, the darkness of the passions and every threat, Thou wilt deliver us who 
with love have recourse to their protection. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О pure, unwedded Theotokos, who without seed hast given birth to the 
Master of all, with the angels entreat Him, that we may be delivered from all 
doubt, and that He grant compunction and light unto our souls, and the cleansing 
offenses, О thou who alone art quick to help. 
ODE I 
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ and His holy martyrs, the 
acrostic whereof is “Grant me an outpouring of tears, О Word of God,” 
the composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought 
up out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
O Word Who didst become incarnate, and camest not to call the righteous, 
but sinners to repentance: Accept me, who have greatly sinned, and save me!  
I alone have been enslaved to sins; I alone have opened the door to the 
passions! О Thou Who alone art easy to appease, turning me back to Thee, save 
me in Thy loving-kindness. 
To the martyrs: Wearing crowns, the passion-bearers stand before Thy 
judgment-seat, О Lord, having triumphed over the audacity of the evil one and 
been enriched with immortality. 
To the martyrs: Pouring forth streams of healings upon us, the passion-bearers 
ever dry up the torrents of our carnal passions by the power of the divine Spirit. 
Theotokion: О maiden who hast given birth to the Wellspring of dispassion, 
heal me, who have been wounded by the passions, and rescue me from everlasting 
fire, О thou who alone art full of the grace of God. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Another canon, of the holy, incorporeal angelic hosts of heaven, the acrostic 
whereof is: “I sing praise to the angelic choir,” of Theophanes, in Tone II. 
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel 
the chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been 
glorified!  
The choirs of the incorporeal beings who glorify Thee as almighty, О Christ, 
didst Thou reveal to be God-bearing coals set afire by the radiance of Thine 
essence. 
Having acquired the power of incorruption and been given the glory of 
immortality, the angels are enlightened by drawing nigh unto Thee, О Christ. 
As perceptible images of purity, the angels were revealed as light-bearers, 
showing forth the immaterial nature of their essence in their forms, О Christ. 
Theotokion: Rejoicing, О pure Virgin, the ranks of the angels ministered at thy 
birthgiving, which transcendeth nature; for thou hast given birth to their God and 
Lord. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the Tree, * firmly establish us in 
Thee, * and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
Christ Who didst enter into an incorrupt womb, through repentance restore 
my soul, which hath been corrupted by the passions, and reveal it to be full of 
everlasting light. 
I have been obedient to the enraging enemy, having committed every sin, and 
have mindlessly angered Thee, the only Long-suffering One, О Lover of mankind. 
To the martyrs: Protected by the Cross, in God the invincible warriors and 
martyrs of the Savior valiantly demolished the fortresses of falsehood as though 
they were ramparts. 
To the martyrs: Your weakness strengthened by divine power, О valiant 
passion-bearers, ye gave the might of the adversary over to utter destruction. 
Theotokion: О Mary, thou golden censer, dispel the stench of my passions, 
and make me steadfast, who am shaken by the assaults of the lying enemy. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath been broken * by Thy might, O Christ, 
* and the enfeebled * have girded themselves with power.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
God Who by nature is deathless, most wisely acting through grace, revealeth 
the immortal armies. (Twice) 
Standing now in your uttermost desire before Christ, О angels, pray ye that all 
of us may be saved. 
Theotokion: The Creator of the ages is known to have accepted a beginning 
under time through thee, О Ever-virgin. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly merciful One.  
Falling into the mire of sin, I destroyed my higher comeliness, О Lord, and I 
fear torment. Wherefore, with the beauty of repentance enlighten my humbled 
soul. 
With lying words the deceiver who stole me away from Thee hath made me 
food for him to devour. О God of all, rescue me from his malice, and call me to 
Thee through examples of repentance. 
To the martyrs: Having Christ as your helper when ye were cast forth to be 
devoured by the wild beasts, burned with fire, maimed and dismembered, О 
martyrs, ye did not deny Him. Earnestly beseech Him on behalf of me, the 
wretched one. 
To the martyrs: Worshipping the Unity in essence, the Trinity of Hypostases, 
the uncreated Godhead, and in nowise worshipping any created thing, ye were 
known as martyrs of Christ; wherefore, ye endured all manner of tortures. 
Theotokion: Of His own will, the Lord took flesh of thy pure blood and 
united Himself to mankind, О pure and most pure one; and, ever appeased by 
thine entreaties, He receiveth those who repent, who from of old have been 
immersed in sin. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: I have heard report O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I 
have glorified, Thine unapproachable power, * O Lover of mankind.  
I bring before Thee the incorporeal ones as advocates, О Compassionate One. 
Accepting them, in that Thou art full of loving-kindness, deliver me from sins. 
Purified, the divine intelligences draw nigh to the all-accomplishing Mind, and 
are enlightened with transcendent understanding. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Adorned by the divine Spirit, the divine adornments of the heavenly ranks are 
immutably preserved. 
Theotokion: Perceiving thee from afar, Isaiah foretold thee as the one who 
would bear God incarnate in thine arms, О Virgin. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
О Thou Who gave light to the eyes of the blind man, enlighten my blinded 
soul, and strengthen it to keep awake for the doing of good, and utterly to hate 
the sleep of slothfulness. 
О only Savior, Who of old healed the wounds of him who fell among thieves, 
heal Thou my soul, which hath truly sustained a grievous wound. 
To the martyrs: Enduring multifarious torments, the company of honored 
spiritual athletes put the council of iniquitous tyrants to shame; and it now ever 
rejoiceth with the sacred bands of the angels. 
To the martyrs: The most radiant martyrs have been revealed to be stars of 
great brilliance, emitting rays of patience and enlightening the souls of the faithful 
with the divine Spirit. 
Theotokion: Unto us hast thou given birth to the paternal God as a little babe, 
having two wills and two activities, in that He is both man and God, О all-
hymned one. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, * and the Sun hath 
shone forth from the Virgin's womb, * granting the enlightenment of the 
knowledge of God * to those who in darkness have gone astray.  
The cherubim and seraphim, shining forth in splendor with the supremely 
exalted thrones near the divine Godhead, divinely illumine all other beings. 
(Twice) 
О Word of God, Bestower of all effulgence, Thou didst bring into being the 
luminous reflections, who receive Thy radiance with gladness and sure 
understanding. 
Theotokion: The sacred Archangel Gabriel, having flown down from heaven, 
О pure Bride of God, declared unto thee that “Rejoice!” which hath released our 
first parents from grief. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
I have fallen headlong through the malice of the serpent, and lie upon the bed 
of despair. О Christ Who by Thy word raised up paralytics, raise me up also. 
Save me, as Thou didst Peter, О Lord, for I am buffeted by the winds of the 
serpent and am ever engulfed by the billows of sin. 
To the martyrs: Far exceeding the limits of nature, ye supra-naturally endured 
tortures, О martyrs; wherefore, ye have been deemed worthy of good things 
transcending understanding. 
To the martyrs: As ones good, comely, and honorable, О most glorious 
martyrs, ye have united yourselves to the Beautiful One, the Creator of the good; 
and ye ever pray for us. 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, the Creator chose thee from among all 
generations, as the beauty of Jacob, whom He hath loved; and, shining forth from 
thee, He revealed Himself. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in 
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the 
Cause of our salvation.  
The divine points of the glory of Thy primary light, glowing with the 
effulgence of Thy splendor, О Master Christ, remain eternally brilliant in radiance. 
(Twice) 
Strengthened by divine power, and crying out the thrice-holy hymn with 
unceasing voices, the seraphim lead in worshipping the Essence in three 
Hypostases. 
Theotokion: The Lord swore in truth unto David, as He said of old; and in 
issuing forth from thy womb He fulfilled His word, for thou hast given birth unto 
Him Who reigneth over heaven and earth, О maiden. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of 
the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  

--- PAGE 15 ---
With a dissolute mind and by the attacks of demons I am filled with all manner 
of shame; and like the prodigal I find myself far removed from Thy 
commandments. But turning now, I cry: “I have sinned like him, but despise me 
not, О Jesus Who didst become incarnate for my sake!” 
О God of all, of old Thou didst save the repentant Ninevites from the 
chastisement which would have brought death upon them. Thus also, О only 
Lover of mankind, deliver from grievous torments my heart which hath been 
defiled by gross fornication, yet returneth now to Thee. 
To the martyrs: О divine martyrs blessed by God, the malicious one who 
desired to wound you was cruelly wounded, remaining unhealed; but your wounds 
have been shown to be healing for all the faithful, who have been wounded by the 
assault of him who of old caused us to stumble. 
To the martyrs: Ye feared neither savage beasts, nor tyrants’ threats, nor fire, 
nor stripes, nor the severing sword, nor red-hot instruments, О great martyrs, but 
endured them all as though in others’ bodies; wherefore, ye have been crowned. 
Theotokion: О most pure maiden, Bride of God, thy womb became the abode 
of the immaterial Light, Who hath dispelled ungodliness with the radiance of 
divine understanding; and, hymning Him, we cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers! 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Of old the youths revealed themselves to be rhetors * with a 
supreme love for wisdom, * for from the depths of their God-pleasing souls, 
* they theologized with their lips as they sang: * O supremely divine God of 
our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Ever joining chorus round about the throne of Thine ineffable glory, the 
celestial intelligences sing with unceasing voices: О supremely divine God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou! (Twice) 
When the angelic ranks beheld Thee borne aloft in the flesh into the heavens, 
they opened wide the celestial gates unto Thee, saying: О supremely divine God 
of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Theotokion: Showing thee to be the beginning of the law and the prophets, 
Gabriel cried out, О maiden: “Lo! thou who alone art all-hymned shalt give birth 
to the supremely divine and blessed God of the fathers and of us!” 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, 
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
I have fallen to the evil one, and been held captive by his wiles; and, seeing me 
stuck fast in utter hopelessness, the deceiver boasts greatly; wherefore, rescue me, 
О Compassionate One, Who art the conversion of those in error. 
Loose me, who am held fast by the unbreakable bonds of carnal passions, О 
Christ, Thou Savior of the world, Who didst loose those fettered with everlasting 
chains; and guide me to seek the ways of salvation. 
To the martyrs: Those who are the cause of the passions have truly brought all 
their malice to bear upon me, the lowly one; but, О blessed martyrs, who truly 
emulated the sufferings of Christ, deliver me from the harm they cause. 
To the martyrs: Refusing to bend their knees before graven images, the all-
famed martyrs were cast, like the children of old, into the furnace of wounds; yet 
through divine dew they were shown to be unburned, hymning Christ throughout 
the ages. 
Theotokion: By thy healing entreaties, О Virgin Birthgiver of God, show forth 
as whole my wretched soul, which hath been weakened by the many assaults of 
the evil one, that I may glorify thee throughout all ages. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, * 
beholding the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst 
of the flame: * Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Thou didst create the angels who carry out Thy commandments with might, to 
be likenesses of Thy goodness, О Word; and they help all the faithful to cry aloud: 
Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages! 
The life of heaven, the ranks of the holy angels, didst Thou adorn with divine 
virtues, О Christ, enlightening them; and they cry unto Thee: Let all existing 
creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Rejoicing in splendor, without fail let us unfailingly chant the divine hymn of 
the incorporeal ones; and, theologizing concerning the Master, let us cry out with 
them in hymnody: Let all existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages! 
Theotokion: The Righteous One, Who in wisdom setteth all things aright, 
loved thee, as is meet, the immaculate and most pure Virgin, ineffably making His 
abode within thee, О most holy Theotokos, and we glorify thee, saying: Let all 
existing creation hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 

--- PAGE 17 ---
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to 
create Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * 
and Who took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * 
Him we faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
Now is the time to act! Why dost thou mindlessly sleep in deep despondency? 
Arise, and replenish thy lamp with tears! Hasten thou, for the Bridegroom 
draweth night unto our souls! Tarry not, lest thou remain outside the divine doors. 
О how awesome is Thy tribunal, which layeth bare before the angels the deeds 
of all! О how grievous is the sentence which Thou shalt pronounce upon sinners! 
Before the end, О Christ, deliver me therefore, granting me tears of conversion. 
To the martyrs: Marked with the divine blood of the Lamb and Shepherd, the 
glorious and divine spiritual athletes rejoiced as they were slain like innocent 
lambs; and in the heavens they now truly enlighten all the holy Church of the first-
born. 
To the martyrs: As ye were shown to be beacons of the radiance of the Sun, О 
valiant spiritual athletes, ye illumine every soul with the beams of your sufferings, 
dispelling all the darkness of deception; wherefore as is meet, with faith we call 
you blessed. 
Theotokion: Spare me, spare me, О Lord, when Thou shalt render judgment! 
Condemn me not to the fire, neither rebuke me in Thine anger. The Virgin who 
gave Thee birth entreats Thee, О Christ, as doth the multitude of the angels and 
the company of martyrs. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Thou art all desire, Thou art all sweetness, * O Word of God, Son of 
the Virgin, * God of gods, most holy Lord of the saints. * Wherefore, we 
magnify Thee * and her who hath given birth to Thee.  
The angels, appearing in garments of dazzling white, told Thy godly disciples 
of Thy second coming, О Christ. With them, we all magnify Thee in theology. 
(Twice) 
As the Benefactor of all rational nature, in Thy surpassing goodness Thou 
didst first create for Thyself a secondary radiance; wherefore, giving thanks, we all 
magnify Thee. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Theotokion: Perceiving thy luminous virginity, and stricken with awe, the 
divine supreme commander offered thee his salutation, О most pure one; 
wherefore, we all magnify thee, the Theotokos. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone II:  
Mindful of the unseemly sins I have committed, I flee to Thy compassions, 
emulating the publican, the harlot who wept, and the prodigal son; wherefore, I 
fall down before Thee, О Merciful One, and say: Before Thou condemnest me, О 
God, have pity and mercy upon me! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Overlook mine iniquities, О Lord Who wast born from the Virgin; and purify 
my heart, making it a temple for Thy Holy Spirit. Turn not Thy face away from 
me, О Thou Who art possessed of great and boundless mercy. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Ye suffered for Christ even unto death, О passion-bearers and 
martyrs. And though your souls are in the heavens, in the hand of God, your relics 
are venerated throughout the whole world. The priests and all the people bow 
down, and cry aloud, rejoicing: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
His saints. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We have placed our trust in thee, О Theotokos. Let us not fall away from 
hope, but save us from misfortunes, О helper of the perplexed, and set at naught 
the counsels of the adversary. For thou art our salvation, О blessed one. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone II: 
We offer Thee the cry of the thief, and we pray: In Thy kingdom have mercy 
upon us, О Savior! 
Save me, О Lord my God, and cause me to share in the portion of those who 
loved Thee with all their soul. 
With fear all the armies of heaven serve Thee as God. By their supplications 
save us. 
To the martyrs: With the sword of the Faith ye vanquished the hordes of the 
enemy, О spiritual athletes, and were brought before God. 
Glory ..., With the race of mankind the noetic ranks worship the simple 
Trinity, the Godhead one in essence. 
Both now ..., О most pure Lady who hast given birth unto God without seed: 
Beseech Him, that we be saved. 
 
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His minis-
ters a flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame 
of fire.  
  
