--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING: TONE II 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
О Christ, Who alone art without sin. * Who alone art without guile, * Who 
alone art the Wellspring of goodness: * Behold mine oppression, behold my 
tribulation. * Wash all the wounds of my stripes, * and in Thy mercy save Thy 
servant, * that, having driven the clouds of slothfulness far from me, * I may 
glorify Thee, ** my supremely good Savior. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Look, О my lowly soul! * Behold thy works, which are all-defiled! * Behold thy 
nakedness * and, alas, thine isolation! * For thou shalt be separated from God and 
the angels, * and cast into endless torment. * Come to thy senses, arise, make 
haste and cry aloud: * I have sinned, О Savior! ** Grant me forgiveness, and save 
me! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
I have grievously defiled my body * and brought corruption upon my soul and 
heart * by my vile thoughts; * I have wounded all my senses, and blinded mine 
eyes, * have stopped up mine ears with filth, * and have defiled my tongue; and all 
that I have is shameful. * Wherefore, falling down before Thee, I cry aloud: * О 
Master Christ, I have sinned against Thee! ** I have sinned; forgive and save me! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy forerunner, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Hasten thou, I pray thee, * and rescue me from temptations, * О glorious 
Forerunner of the Lord; * for the bitter demons who wage war on me, * vainly 
hurl themselves against me, * seeking to capture the soul of thy servant like a 
helpless bird. * Leave me not utterly alone, О all-blessed one, * but let them 
understand ** that thou art my refuge. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
О all-holy offspring of a barren woman, * wondrous scion of the desert, * 
beauteous swallow, * right melodious nightingale, * golden dove: * Ever show 
forth my wretched soul * to be fruitful in good works, * that, bearing grain an 
hundredfold, О blessed one, ** it may bring divine praise unto thee. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Deliver me I pray thee, О Forerunner; * from everlasting fire, * from the 
darkness which is utterly devoid of light, * from necessity and tribulation, * from 
all affliction, and all oppression, * and by thy supplications show unto me, * who 
am condemned by my transgressions, * the portion of the saved, ** where the 
delight and joy of the saints is ineffable, О good one. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Tribulation, cruel assaults, and divers passions * bestorm my lowly soul, * О 
maiden who knewest not wedlock, * Mother of Christ God. * Show thyself to be 
my pilot on the sea of life, * and still the tempest that assails me, * steering me to 
the calm harbors * of repentance and coolness, ** for I have made recourse to thy 
divine protection. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst 
hearken unto me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone II: 
Like the prodigal son I have sinned against Thee, О Savior. Accept me who 
am penitent, О Father. Have mercy upon me, О God! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
With the cry of the publican I cry out to Thee, О Christ my Savior: Cleanse me 
as Thou didst him, and have mercy on me, О God! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: When the holy martyrs pray for us and hymn Christ, all 
delusion ceaseth, and the race of mankind is saved by faith. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
 
All of my hope do I place on thee, * O Mother of God; ** keep me under thy 
protection.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE II 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
With the Archangel Gabriel the Church offereth in hymnody an ever-
flowering wreath of praise, which sprang forth through the Spirit unto thee, the 
Bride of God, О pure one, chanting “Rejoice!” and crowning thee with honor. 
Having cultivated Christ God, the life-bearing vine, О all-hymned Mother of 
God, thou wast revealed to be the holy ground of the Father in a manner 
transcending understanding, watering the whole world with life-bearing drink, О 
pure one, full of the grace of God. 
Glory ..., О most pure one, thou hast given birth to the God of the whole 
world which is cruelly battered and engulfed by the waves of transgressions, the 
Lord of us all, Christ the Helmsman, Who faithfully pilots us to the haven of 
salvation. 
Both now ..., We all faithfully entreat thee, О Mary, Mother of God, thou 
refuge and city of salvation, and we fervently make supplication unto thee: Accept 
the entreaties of us thy servants, and release us all from the condemnation of 
transgressions. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the Tree, * firmly establish us in 
Thee, * and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
The beguilement of Eve was the beginning of the estrangement between God 
and mortals; but the holy Theotokos hath led us back to God. 
The glorious Joachim begat thee, the treasury of Life, for the world, О all-
hymned one, and he rejoiceth in thee, his goodly offspring, for thou didst come as 
the expectation of thy barren parents. 
Glory ..., From Anna hath joy blossomed forth for our race. Thou hast given 
birth to the King as a Virgin. And women, released from the curse by thee, rejoice 
in thy birthgiving. 
Both now ..., The bush on Sinai prefigured Thy most glorious birthgiving, О 
Virgin; for, receiving the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, О pure one, thou 
wast not consumed. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I 
have glorified, Thine unapproachable power, * O Lover of mankind.  
In a godly manner Jacob foresaw thee as a ladder, О Virgin, upon whose 
summit God established Himself. 
Through thee, О most pure one, was the descent of the angels revealed 
beforehand to signify the advent of the Word to us. 
Glory ..., Blessed is thy womb and thy breasts, О all-hymned Virgin; for, for 
their sake, we have all found Life. 
Both now ..., With Orthodox voices we mystically hymn thee, О Mother of 
God, for by thy supplications the Church is preserved. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness 
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with 
Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
We hymn thee, О Mary Theotokos, as one more honorable than the ark of the 
law, for thou, О all-hymned one, didst bear the Creator and God of all like the 
tablets of the law. 
We glorify thee as the throne of God the Word, sitting upon which, God hath 
revealed Himself as a man; and thou hast become more exalted than the 
cherubim. 
Glory ..., Thou hast released the whole race of mankind from bitter bondage, 
О Virgin, and hast honored the nature of women with the freedom of Christ in 
thy divine birthgiving. 
Both now ..., Thou hast given birth to the Son, О Virgin, and women 
manifestly vanquish the enemy; wherefore, holding fast to virginity, they hasten to 
thee, О maiden. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
With the angel we faithfully cry out to thee: Rejoice, О pure virgin, thou joy of 
the world! Grant us thy joy, and do away with our grief! 
Unto us who with faith praise thee, the dwelling-place of joy which cannot be 
taken away, О Ever-virgin Mother, grant thy joy and do away with our grief. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., In thy divine glory thou hast been revealed to be a heaven more 
exalted than the heavens, О Bride of God; for making His abode within thee, our 
God hath appeared unto me. 
Both now ..., Now doth the nature of women rejoice! Now doth grief cease to 
be and joy hath blossomed forth! For Mary hath given birth to joy: Christ, our 
God and Savior. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Looking upon the grievous slothfulness of my soul and the utter weakness of 
my heart, О Mother of God, heal me by thy supplications and grant me the 
portion of the saved, delivering me from darkness and torment, in that thou alone 
art my hope and consolation. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of 
the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
The fleece of Gideon prefigured the descent of the Word of God upon thee, 
О pure one, for thou didst accept conception like dew, О incorrupt Virgin. 
Wherefore, we all cry out to thee: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О pure one. 
New and awesome, full of faith and wondrous are thy mysteries, О Mary, 
Mother of Christ our God; for through thee have we all been reconciled with God 
the Master; and we chant now with the angels: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, 
О pure one. 
Glory ..., Of old Gideon manifestly foretold thy divine birthgiving, О pure 
one, setting forth a bowl full of water from the wringing out of the fleece; for 
God dwelt wholly within thee, О most pure one. Blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb. 
Both now ..., In giving birth to the God and Savior of all, О Mary, thou didst 
become the correction of the despairing, the restoration of sinners, the hope of 
the hopeless and the help of those who chant: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О 
pure one. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew 
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and 
supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thou hast been revealed to be a new garden of paradise, containing the tree of 
Life, not that of death, О most holy Theotokos; for like a garden thou didst 
seedlessly produce the Lord, through Whom we all partake of immortal life. 
The whole Church of Christ doth hymn thy birthgiving, О Theotokos, for all 
who flee to thee with love, sinners and poor folk alike, are saved; for Christ hath 
come to earth to save mankind. 
Glory ..., Through thee, О Virgin Theotokos, thy first mother hath been freed 
from condemnation. And, lo! women now suffer for Christ, and female nature 
rejoiceth, as Thecla, the first martyred woman, doth exclaim. 
Both now ..., No one hath perished who in an Orthodox manner hath 
acquired the hope of faith in thee, О pure Virgin Mother of God; but he is cast 
aside who with jealousy refuses to venerate thy depicted image. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and all-pure Theotokos, * who 
through thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the 
Luminary Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the 
flesh.  
О most holy Virgin, incline thine ear unto me who with faith hymn thy 
birthgiving with words of praise; and, accepting the hymnody of my lips like the 
widow’s gift, ask for the forgiveness of my sins. 
Thy beauty shineth forth, emitting the radiance of purity, О pure one; and thy 
birthgiving shineth even more than these, for God, the Creator of the sun and all 
creation, hath been born from thee. Wherefore, we all magnify thee. 
Glory ..., Divinely chanting in hymns with a voice of praise, О Theotokos, we 
beseech thee, the light of purity, the staff of virginity and Mother of God: 
establish us in virginity and preserve us in purity. 
Both now ..., In that thou hadst preserved thy body and soul undefiled for 
God, О pure one, Christ the King desired thy beauty and showed thee to be the 
Mother of His incarnation, accomplishing my salvation, О most glorious Mary.  
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. 
Trisagion through Our Father ..., And the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, these  
Sessional Hymns of compunction, in Tone II: 
Mindful of the dread day of trial, О my soul, tremble at the sentence to 
everlasting torment, and in repentance cry aloud, weeping: I have sinned, О God! 
Have mercy on me! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Testing my condemned conscience, I am in fear of Thy dread tribunal, О 
Lord; for in me there are no works of salvation. Yet as Thou art possessed of a 
wealth of loving-kindness, О Christ God, have pity on me, and save me. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We magnify thee, O Theotokos, crying aloud: * Thou art the un-burnt bush, * 
wherein Moses beheld as a flame ** the Fire of the Divinity. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of compunction, in Tone II: 
“Have mercy on me,” said David; and I cry unto Thee: “I have sinned, О 
Savior! Cleanse me of my sins through repentance, and have mercy on me!” 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
“Have mercy on me, О God, have mercy on me!” David wept over his two 
sins; and I cry out to Thee over my tens of thousands of transgressions; he made 
his bed moist with tears, but I shed nary a one. Wherefore, I am in despair, and 
pray: “Have mercy on me, О God, according to Thy great mercy!” 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: О Christ God Who, in that Thou art good, hast made Thy 
saints to shine with greater luster than gold, and hast glorified Thy holy ones, 
entreated by them grant peace to our lives, in that Thou lovest mankind, and set 
their prayer before Thee like incense, О Thou Who alone restest in the saints. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Theotokos turn not away from me * who am in need of thy help! * for my 
soul trusteth in thee: ** do thou have mercy upon me! 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “As the wellspring of loving-kindness ...”: 

--- PAGE 9 ---
In the streams of the Jordan thou didst immerse the abundant Wellspring of 
loving-kindness, О John; wherefore, I earnestly beseech thee: Guide me by thy 
right acceptable prayers to the haven of life, for every day I am cruelly engulfed by 
many passions and the abyss of life. 
In the tender compassion of Thy mercy, О Good Christ, Thou didst come to 
save Thy creature, bowing down the heavens in Thy condescension; wherefore, 
hymning Thine awesome dispensation, we cry unto Thee: By the prayers of Thy 
forerunner, grant us cleansing of sins, in that Thou alone art full of loving-
kindness. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Who hath seen, who hath heard of a mother giving birth to her own Creator, 
without knowing a man, and giving suck unto Him Who gives nourishment to all 
flesh? О the wonder! Thy womb hath been revealed to be the throne of the 
cherubim, О gracious Theotokos. Pray for our souls. 
Canon of repentance, to our Lord Jesus Christ and the holy martyrs, the 
acrostic whereof is: “Thou accedest to my lamentations, О Savior,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
ODE I 
Irmos: Taking up the Song of Moses, O my soul, * cry aloud: * 'A helper 
and a protector hath become unto me salvation. * My God, * whom I will 
glorify'. 
Before our departure let us weep bitterly, О brethren, that by goodly tears we, 
who are devoid of anything that is profitable, may avoid torment at that time. 
Ten thousands of times I vowed to repent, О Christ, but my soul is numb, and 
I fall into transgressions. Have pity on my weakness, О Savior. 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers of Christ, who endured the fire of torment, 
with divine dew deliver from the fire of Gehenna, me who wallow in grievous 
passions. 
To the martyrs: Shown to be mighty in divine power over the enemy, О right 
praiseworthy martyrs of Christ, ye cast down their feeble force. 
Theotokion: О fire-bearing tongs, which Isaiah once beheld, burn up the base 
passions of my heart, and destroy them utterly, О Birthgiver of God. 
Another canon, of the holy and most honorable prophet, John the 
Forerunner, the acrostic whereof is “O Baptist, accept this entreaty,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone II:  
Irmos: The Lord mighty in battle * uncovered the foundation of the deep * 
and led His servants on dry ground; * but He covered their adversaries with 
the waters, * for He hath been glorified. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
O Baptist and Forerunner of Christ, pilot my mind, which is ever 
overwhelmed by bodily pleasures, and still the waves of the passions, that I may 
hymn thee in divine serenity. 
Illumined with inconceivable enlightenment, like a star of great radiance thou 
didst go forth before the noetic Dawn. Thereby, О Baptist, I pray: Let my heart 
be enlightened, for it hath been darkened by the assaults of demons. 
In the river, О most wise one, thou didst once immerse the Abyss Who by 
grace hath brought about the drowning of all transgression. And I pray, О blessed 
one: By thy divine mediation dry up the torrents of my sins. 
Theotokion: Thou wast the kinsman of the pure Virgin who gave flesh unto 
God; and we who now dwell in thy divine temple honor thee with her, and we 
pray: Make us also temples of the Holy Spirit. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit, * but do Thou show me 
to be fruitful * in Thy compassion O God, * Thou husbandman of all good 
things. 
I have weighed my soul down with the slumber of slothfulness. But rouse me, 
О Christ unto the wakefulness of repentance, that I may do Thy commandments. 
Let me not be seen as desperate on the dread day, О Jesus, but, converting me 
before the end, deliver me from cruel torments. 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers of Christ, who emulated well His sufferings, 
heal the grievous passions of my soul. 
To the martyrs: That ye might be deemed worthy of eternal good things in the 
heavens, О passion-bearers, ye steadfastly endured every trial of the cruel ones 
here on earth. 
Theotokion: As a mother thou givest suck to the Nourisher of all, and in thine 
arms didst bear Him Who ever holdeth all things in His hand. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I 
sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Heal the stripes of my soul, О Forerunner of the Lord, and with thy divine 
mediation illumine my mind, which hath been obscured by indifference; and 
deliver me from every machination of the adversary, I pray. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Born in accordance with the providence of God, О most wise prophet, thou 
didst free thy mother from barrenness; wherefore, by thy prayers make my barren 
heart now fruitful, О Forerunner of the Lord, that it may put forth the virtues as 
shoots. 
In thy love pray that those who with faith serve thy temple may receive the 
heavenly life of Him Who createth the divine abodes; and by thy prayers, О 
Baptist and Forerunner, make them temples of the divine Spirit. 
Theotokion: Carried in the womb of thy mother, О Forerunner, thou didst 
rejoice and pay homage to the Lord, Who was borne in the womb of her who is 
full of grace. Him do thou entreat, that He deliver me from all tribulation. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The prophet foreseeing Thy birth from a virgin, * prophesied crying 
aloud: * ‘I have heard report of Thee, and I was afraid; * For from the 
South, from the Overshadowed mountain * shalt thou come forth O Christ’ 
Seeing me everywhere robbed and reduced to penury, the enemy, the crafty 
deceiver, rejoices, О Word. But deliver me from his wickedness, О Lord of glory, 
and Enrichment of the poor. 
I have defiled my hands and eyes, having done those things which I ought not 
to have done, О Lord; and I have turned Thy compassions to wrath, squandering 
Thy longsuffering. But look down, О good One, and have pity on me. 
To the martyrs: How wondrous is our God in the saints who heeded Him, 
who overturned the graven images unto their destruction, and have inherited the 
broad expanse of paradise, from whence Adam was expelled of old. 
To the martyrs: With the streams of your blood, О blessed ones, ye put an end 
to the blood once offered to the demons, which was the destructive ruination for 
all those who offered it up in sacrifice; wherefore, ye are ever called blessed. 
Theotokion: Taught by the Spirit, in sacred images and divers ways the most 
glorious choir of the prophets depicted beforehand the mystery of thee, which 
passeth understanding, О Theotokos, the end whereof we splendidly behold. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor 
as an angel, * but the very Lord Himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 

--- PAGE 12 ---
With thy right hand, thou didst bow the head of Him Who bowed down the 
heavens and conversed with us, О thou who art most noetically rich. Preserve me 
also thereby, maintaining my heart in humility. 
The trackless desert had thee dwelling within it, О blessed Forerunner; 
wherefore, I cry unto thee: Keep safe my soul, which is devoid of any divine 
activity. 
Observing the law of God, thou wast iniquitously slain; wherefore, I pray to 
thee: Set me aright, who ever commit iniquity and am led astray by the delusions 
of the demons. 
Having made thyself a temple for the King and Master, О Forerunner, thou 
hast now passed over to the divine habitations. Pray thou that those who have 
raised up a divine house unto thee may receive it. 
Theotokion: Look down upon me who am ailing, О all-immaculate one, and 
free me from my grievous and nigh incurable passions, that I may magnify thee 
who hast magnified all humanity. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Having dispelled the gloom of my soul, * O my Savior, do Thou 
illumine me * with the light of Thy commandments * for Thou alone art 
the King of peace. 
Mindlessly I heap sins upon sins, and there can be no uplifting in my death. 
Woe is me! How shall I appear before Christ? 
Misfortune hath smitten me like a ship, and I have cast overboard the freight 
Thou gavest me, О Compassionate One; and, now impoverished, I cry: Disdain 
me not, О Christ! 
To the martyrs: Having disdained base glory as worthy to be trampled 
underfoot, О passion-bearers, abiding with Christ ye have been deemed worthy of 
the glory of heaven. 
To the martyrs: Having cut your mind off from the love of the flesh, О 
passion-bearers, with faith ye lovingly embraced tortures, becoming Christ’s. 
Theotokion: In the Spirit, О Theotokos, Daniel beheld thee as the great 
mountain from whence the Stone was quarried Who crusheth the graven images 
of the demons. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness 
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with 
Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
О Forerunner, who baptized Christ, the Stream of incorruption, in the torrents 
of the Jordan: Beseech Him to dry up the stench of my passions, that I may 
inherit torrents of sweetness and the beautiful joy of the righteous. 
Already I lament, and am constrained by fear, and am ever perplexed, 
contemplating the things I have done and the terrible judgment which is to come. 
О compassionate Lord, have pity on me, by the prayers of Thy Forerunner. 
О Forerunner, who didst tell the people that the law of salvation lieth in 
repentance for their transgressions, thou didst stand before the law and grace; 
wherefore, we entreat thee: Enlighten us with examples of repentance. 
Grant unto me the time to repent, for I have wasted all the time given me 
despondently, О Benefactor and Word, in that Thou hast John, the great 
Forerunner and universal preacher of repentance, entreating Thee for this. 
Theotokion: I have been slain by the assaults and pursuit of the deceiver, О 
all-immaculate Lady. Enliven me, О Theotokos who hast given birth to the 
hypostatic Life of all, that with piety I may hymn thee, the all-immaculate one. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: I am held fast in the depths of sin O Savior, * and am overwhelmed 
by the sea of life, * but as Jonah was delivered from the sea-monster, * so 
also deliver me from the passions, * and save me.  
Like the Canaanite woman of old I cry unto Thee: О Son of God, have mercy 
and pity on me! For my soul suffereth in its grievous deeds, and desireth not to 
come to its senses. 
The tempest of countless passions vexeth me. As once Thou didst rebuke the 
sea and save Thy holy disciples, О Jesus Christ, so raise me up and save me. 
To the martyrs: The incorporeal angelic choirs marveled at your bodily 
endurance, О honored spiritual athletes, and they praised Him Who granteth you 
power and the reward for your toils. 
To the martyrs: Soaked by the streams of your own blood, your eyes plucked 
out, chilled by the perishing cold, О martyrs, ye passed over to the warmth of life, 
hymning Christ. 
Theotokion: Like a table, О all-hymned one, thou didst hold the mystical 
Bread, of Whom those who eat will no longer hunger, knowing thee to be truly 
the Mother and Nourisher of Christ, the God of all. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
О voice who proclaimed the Word, accepting the cries of us all, ask that He 
grant forgiveness of sins unto those who hymn Him with faith. 
Heal the broken state of my soul, loose the burden of my sins, and by thy 
supplications save me who am beyond hope, О blessed Forerunner. 
Entreat Jesus, Whom thou didst baptize with thy hand, О most glorious 
Forerunner, that from the hand of sin He deliver me who ever lift up my hands 
unto Him. 
Theotokion: I am stuck fast in the slumber of slothfulness, and the sleep of sin 
weigheth heavily upon my heart. But by thy vigilant mediation raise me up, О 
most pure one, and save me. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Like unto the cherubim, the Children rejoicing in the furnace sang: 
* 'Blessed art Thou O God, * for in truth Thou hast brought this judgment 
upon us * because of our sins, * Thou art supremely praised and glorified 
throughout all ages'. 
I have rejected Thy laws and made myself subject to irrational lusts, doing 
unseemly things, О Christ, for I have become vain in my mindlessness more than 
any other men on earth. But in Thy loving-kindness leave me not to perish, О 
Savior. 
Behold, I have been conceived in iniquities, О Lord: like David I cry out, like 
the harlot I weep, for like an offensive servant I have offended Thee, the only 
good God. But in Thy tender compassion leave me not to perish, О Savior. 
To the martyrs: The martyric assembly of the passion-bearers struggled and 
were crowned as martyrs by the life-bearing right hand of God; for they truly 
loved God, Who created all things by His word. And rejoicing now in the 
heavens, they enjoy a divine inheritance. 
To the martyrs: Their eyes plucked out, their hands and feet severed, the right 
glorious ones ran right speedily to the heavenly course, treading on the feet of the 
one enemy. By their supplications, О Word, save all who glorify Thee. 
Theotokion: The cherubim, the seraphim, the thrones, authorities and 
dominions ever glorify and hymn thy birthgiving, which transcends 
understanding, О all-hymned Mary, for thou alone hast given birth to God in the 
flesh. Him do thou entreat, О pure one, that we who honor thee with love may be 
saved. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He 
is blessed and supremely exalted. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Having hewn down the wounds of my passion-plagued heart with thine axe of 
repentance, О Forerunner, plant in their stead divine dispassion and the most 
pure fear of God, which remove me from all evil. 
As thou didst baptize in the streams of the Jordan the Lord Who covereth His 
chambers with the waters, beseech Him ever to give the water of divine 
compunction to mine eyes, О glorious Forerunner. 
Having preached the Lamb of God, Who taketh away the sin of the world, О 
glorious Forerunner, beseech Him to deliver me from the lot of the goats, and to 
number me among the lambs at His right hand. 
Theotokion: A barren womb bore thee, О Virgin, who didst bear in thy womb 
the Word incarnate, Whom the great Forerunner, rejoicing, acknowledged with 
godly leaps as the all-holy and seedless Fruit, bowing down before Him. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * unto 
Moses in the burning bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless and 
supremely exult throughout all ages. 
That Thou mightest deify us, in Thy mercy Thou didst become incarnate. This 
I have failed to understood, slave that I am to pleasures. But in Thy goodness 
convert me, О Christ, Thou salvation of all. 
О Word, good Shepherd, turn Thou and save my wretched soul, which hath 
become lost in the mountains of transgression, and let not the deceiving foe 
utterly slay me. 
To the martyrs: “Let us stand manfully together!” the comely spiritual athletes 
cried one to another as they were cruelly wounded. “Behold, Christ extendeth 
crowns of victory to us throughout all ages!” 
To the martyrs: With your mighty pangs, as with strong cords, ye choked the 
serpent who desired to deceive you with evil machinations; and ye have been 
revealed to be inheritors of the food of paradise. 
Theotokion: That God might deify us, He took flesh from thy pure blood and 
became a man, О Virgin Theotokos. Him do thou ever entreat on behalf of those 
who honor thee. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, 
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Extend thy right hand unto me who lie on the ground, О Forerunner who, 
extending thy right hand, didst wash the Undefiled One in the waters. Deliver me 
from bodily corruption, cleansing me wholly with repentance; and save me. 
As thou hast time to repent, О my soul, shake off the heavy sleep of 
slothfulness, and hasten to keep watch, crying out to thy Master: 
Have pity on me, О Thou Who art full of loving-kindness, by the prayers of 
him who baptized Thee. 
The torrents of the passions and the waters of evil have entered in unto my 
soul, О blessed Forerunner. Hasten thou to quickly rescue me, О thou who in the 
river’s streams washed the most tranquil Deep of dispassion. 
Alas for me who have done much evil! Woe is me, who alone have angered the 
supremely good God! О thou who didst baptize Christ, help me, and by thy 
mediations grant me the remission of my transgressions and the annulment of my 
debts. 
Theotokion: О thou who gavest. birth in the flesh unto the Most High God, 
raise me up from the mire of the passions which sorely trouble me, О most pure 
one, and enrich me with divine virtues, for I am grievously and wholly 
impoverished, that, saved, I may hymn thee. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Who born on Earth hath ever heard of, or beheld, * a Virgin 
miraculously conceiving in her womb, * and painlessly giving birth to a 
child, * wherefore we magnify thee O pure Virgin. 
О how awesome is the tribunal at which I shall await judgment, О Christ; yet I 
in nowise feel terror thereof, spending all my time in idleness. But convert me, О 
only Creator, Who converted the sinful Manasseh. 
Staunch the torrents of my boundless evils, I cry unto Thee, О Christ, granting 
me outpourings of tears which wash away the defilement in which I wallowed in 
mine insanity; and in Thy mercy save me, О Thou Who didst save the harlot who 
repented with all her soul. 
To the martyrs: Shining forth upon us like the sun, the splendid memory of 
the divine passion-bearers sheddeth light upon all the ends of the earth, and with 
the divine Spirit dispels the gloom of the madness of idolatry and the darkness of 
the soul-corrupting passions. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
To the martyrs: The honored regiment, the victorious army, the chosen 
company, the assembly of the holy martyrs, the divine choir have united 
themselves to the choirs of the incorporeal ones. By their prayers, О Christ, grant 
us all to share in Thy kingdom. 
Theotokion: With the radiant effulgence of Him Who shone forth upon us 
from thy womb, destroying the night of ungodliness, О Mary, Virgin Mother, 
enlighten all who honor thee with faith; and at the hour of condemnation, deliver 
them from the darkness which is devoid of light. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The beginningless Son of God the Father and the Lord, * became 
flesh from the Virgin, * to give light to those in darkness, * and to gather 
the dispersed. * Wherefore we magnify the all-hymned Theotokos! 
Deliver me from the mire of sin, О only sinless and greatly merciful Lord, 
through the prayers of the Baptist who proclaimed Thee, the Lamb of God, to the 
whole world, as He Who taketh away the sins of all. 
Having thee as a fragrant rose, as a right redolent cypress tree, as a never-
fading lily, as precious myrrh, О Forerunner of the Lord, running to thy 
protection I am delivered from the stench of my deeds by thy supplications. 
О all-blessed one, make me who have become barren through my fruitless 
deeds, ever fruitful in the virtues, and a child of the Lord, a sharer in the divine 
kingdom and a dweller with the council of the saints. 
From heaven grant remission of evils, correction of life and deliverance from 
transgressions unto us who love thee, who honor thee with love and join chorus 
in thy divine temple, О Forerunner of the Lord. 
Theotokion: Thou didst pay homage unto Him Who was borne in the womb 
of the Mother of God and holdeth all things in His hand, О prophet. With her 
pray that my lowly soul may be saved, for every day it falleth into many offenses. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone II: 
I have surpassed all in sin! From whom shall I learn repentance? If I sigh like 
the publican, I only burden the heavens; if I weep like the harlot, I defile the earth 
with my tears. But grant me remission of sins, О God, and have mercy on me. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Overlook mine iniquities, О Lord Who wast born from the Virgin; and purify 
my heart, making it a temple for Thy Holy Spirit. Turn not Thy face away from 
me, О Thou Who art possessed of great and boundless mercy. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Taking up the Cross of Christ as a trophy of victory, О holy martyrs, ye set at 
naught all the power of the devil; and receiving heavenly crowns, ye have become 
bulwarks for us, praying to the Lord on our behalf. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, * thou indestructible and surpassingly holy 
temple; * as the prophet crieth out: ** Holy is thy temple, wondrous in 
righteousness!  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone II: 
We offer Thee the cry of the thief, and we pray: In Thy kingdom have mercy 
upon us, О Savior! 
I have surpassed the thief and the harlot in my passions. О Savior, have pity 
on me who am self-condemned! 
О Forerunner who immersed the Abyss of loving-kindness in the waters, by 
thy supplications decrease my passions. 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers of Christ, who dried up the torrents of 
deception with the torrents of your blood, ye are glorified as is meet. 
Glory ..., As it is written, even the rhetorical mind of man is unable to hymn 
the one Principle of the Godhead in three Hypostases. 
Both now ..., With songs of praise let us all unceasingly hymn her who, 
without being consumed, gave birth to the beginningless God. 
 
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
  
