--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE II 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Like spiritual rivers * issuing forth separately from Eden, О wise ones, * ye 
have watered the whole earth * and, having ploughed it, and sown the preaching 
of salvation, * ye have reaped right fruitful grain, * the souls of the saved, * laying 
them up in the noetic granaries * like riches of great price, ** О disciples of the 
Lord. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
О ye luminaries of the noetic East, * free my heart, which is sorely distressed 
by the passions, * from the darkness of passionate pleasures, * O most radiant 
heralds of the Sun, * for ye announced unto all * Him Who hath banished the 
night of unbelief. * Wherefore entreat Him, * that He enlighten also our minds, ** 
in that ye were eyewitnesses unto Him. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Bearing the saving Word * which was written by the Spirit * by the finger of 
the Father, * ye were truly shown to be * divinely inscribed tablets of the new 
grace, * animate scrolls and initiates of His mysteries; * wherefore, ye traversed all 
the ends of the earth, * manifesting the Orthodox Faith to all mankind ** and 
revealing the path which leadeth to the heavens. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Having lived bodily in Myra, * thou wast truly revealed to be myrrh; * and, 
anointed with noetic myrrh, * О holy Nicholas, hierarch of Christ, * thou didst 
spread the sweet-smelling fragrance of immortality * upon those who with faith 
have recourse to thy protection, * releasing them from perils, * misfortunes and 
tribulations ** by thy supplications to the Lord, О father. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Held fast by a multitude of temptations, * surrounded by the threefold billows 
of life, * engulfed by the waves of evil circumstances, * and beset by griefs, * I 
place all my hope in thee, * О father Nicholas. * By thy prayers unto God our 
Master, * О blessed one, grant me remission ** of all mine evils. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Come, and with the light of grace * illumine me who am beset by the darkness 
* and the gloom of wicked thoughts * and the delusions of the demons, * for 
tempest-tossed by carnal passions, * I have been overcome by the law of sin; * 
for, thou art illumined with divine effulgence, * О right blessed Nicholas, ** and a 
light amid the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Like a great Sun, the Word, * Who is equal in honor * with the Father and the 
Spirit, * and Who in latter times shone forth upon the earth * through the divine 
Virgin maiden, * emitted you, О ye glorious apostles, * like rays illumining with 
the light of Faith all mankind * which languishes in the darkness of delusion, ** 
leading them unto Him with divine teachings. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the apostles, in Tone II: 
Throughout the whole world Thou didst magnify the names of Thy 
preeminent apostles, О Savior, for they learned heavenly things and imparted 
ineffable healings unto mortals. They who were fishermen healed diseases by their 
handkerchiefs alone; they who were Jews theologized the doctrines of grace. For 
their sake, О Thou Who art full of loving-kindness, grant us great mercy. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
We, who are ever assailed by the actions of the unrighteous, yet truly find 
refuge in Thee, Who art God, offer unto Thee the voice of Thy disciples, saying: 
Save us, О our Instructor, for we are perishing! And we pray: Show now to our 
enemies that Thou dost protect and save from misfortunes those who have 
recourse to the supplications of the apostles, overlooking their sins in Thy great 
goodness. О Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
To the martyrs: Great is the glory ye have acquired by faith; for ye not only 
vanquished the enemy in your sufferings, but in death ye drive away evil spirits 
and heal the infirm, О physicians of souls and bodies. Pray ye to the Lord, that 
our souls may find mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Like a fruitful olive tree, * the Virgin brought Thee forth as the Fruit of life, * 
bearing unto the world, ** the fruit of rich and great mercy.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE II 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos  
ODE I 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought 
up out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
From cruel misfortunes, infirmities and transgressions, О most pure one, do 
thou now save me who with my soul and mouth piously confess thee to be the 
Theotokos. 
We have come to know the whole depth of the grace which lieth within thee; 
wherefore, fleeing earnestly to thy divine protection, О Theotokos, we are saved. 
Glory ..., Entreat Him Who became incarnate from thy most pure and 
precious blood, О most pure one, on behalf of us who hymn thee, that we may be 
delivered from transgressions and bitter pain. 
Both now ..., All of us, the faithful, have acquired thee as our refuge, 
confirmation and joy, the salvation of our souls, our hope and bulwark, О thou 
who art full of the grace of God. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the Tree, * firmly establish us in 
Thee, * and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
By thy supplications, О pure one, render God, to Whom thou hast given birth, 
easily reconciled with thy servants, who have recourse to thy protection and 
worship thy birthgiving with faith. 
О all-hymned Virgin, hearken unto my prayers, which issue forth from the 
depths of my heart, and which I offer unto thee; and save me from sufferings and 
perils. 
Glory ..., Direct my whole life, О Virgin, my hope and intercessor, delivering 
me from temptations and the visitation of the needs of life, О Bride of God. 
Both now ..., In that thou didst bear the hypostatic Wisdom of God in thine 
arms, О Mother of God, pray thou that we be delivered from ignorance and error. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report O Lord, * of Thy glorious dispensation, * and I 
have glorified, Thine unapproachable power, * O Lover of mankind.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
О Lady who hast given birth to God, grant me release from the wounds of my 
soul and the defilements of the flesh. 
With faith and hope, О Virgin, make me steadfast, who have been defiled by 
the passions, evil thoughts and the threefold waves of life. 
Glory ..., By thy supplications deliver me from the visitation of tempest and 
tribulations, О only all-hymned Mother of God. 
Both now ..., Rescue me who am battered by the waves of life, О Virgin, 
guiding me to thy harbor. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
Having thee as an invincible weapon against the divers temptations of the 
enemy, we who acknowledge thee to be the pure Theotokos are manifestly 
delivered from all affliction. 
More exalted than the cherubim, thou gavest birth to the fullness of the law: 
the only-begotten Son, God the Word incarnate. Him do thou beseech on behalf 
of thy servants. 
Glory ..., As thou didst bear the Creator of all in thine arms, О pure one, by 
thine intercessions render Him easily reconciled with us who now flee to thee with 
all our heart. 
Both now ..., In oppression and pain of soul I offer my supplication unto thee, 
wretch that I am: О thou who alone hast given birth to the Word, the Source of 
compassions, take pity, and save me! 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
I know thee to be the haven of salvation, О Lady, and sailing the sea of life, 
which is full of great grief, I cry out to thee: Be thou the helmsman of my soul! 
I have been stripped bare of the vesture of chastity and am greatly afflicted; yet 
grant me a robe of joy, О Ever-virgin Mother who hast given birth to God. 
Glory..., I have fallen away from a pure life and live in slothfulness, beguiled 
by the passions; yet raise me up, О blessed Lady, bringing me back to the precepts 
of thy Son. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., Grant unto me thy mercy, О Theotokos who hast given birth to 
the supremely merciful Word Who by His own blood hath delivered mankind 
from corruption. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
By thy prayers, О pure Ever-virgin, grant me divine entry, and, having broken 
asunder the bonds of my cruel passions, free me from the flame which is to come. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of 
the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
He Who became incarnate from thee, О Birthgiver of God, and was nailed to 
the Cross hath rent asunder the record of Adam. Him do thou now beseech, О 
Virgin, that they may be delivered from all evil who cry out with faith: Blessed art 
thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh! 
О Lady, thou art the goodly hope and helper of the faithful; and we now pray 
to thee, that thou grant an abyss of mercy unto all who set their hope on thee and 
cry out to thee: Blessed art thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh! 
Glory ..., Beset by the cruel darkness of life, I have found no-one to share my 
suffering and pain. О Virgin, by thy radiance loose thou the darkness of 
transgressions and illumine me, that I may hymn thee: Blessed art thou who hast 
given birth to God in the flesh! 
Both now ..., Having been clothed through baptism in the beautiful robe of 
the saving commandments, I have sullied it with slothfulness, wretch that I am; 
and I now flee to thee, О Virgin, asking that through thee I may be clothed again 
in the vesture of salvation. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew 
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and 
supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
My mind now faileth, having fallen into the abyss of dishonor, for I have been 
beset from every quarter by divers evils; yet do thou, О Virgin, heal me, clothing 
me in the light of dispassion. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Having acquired thee through faith as a steadfast tower and foundation of 
strength, a protector and helper, О most pure one, we are now saved, hymning 
thine Offspring and supremely exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., О Theotokos, we know thee as a ray and wellspring of immortality, 
for thou hast given birth to the Word of the immortal Father, Who delivereth 
from death all who supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Both now ..., О pure one, thou dost ever pour forth streams of healings upon 
us, the faithful, and taking abundant grace there-from, О pure one, we hymn thine 
Offspring and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to 
create Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * 
and Who took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * 
Him we faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
О maiden blessed by God, I have earnestly placed all my hope in thee: Save 
me, О Mother of the true Life, and pray thou, О pure one, that I who with faith 
and love magnify thee with hymns may be filled with everlasting sustenance. 
О Virgin who wast revealed to be the portal of the divine Light, by thine 
immaterial light and radiance illumine the darkness of my soul, and by thy 
mediations grant that I may be delivered from eternal fire, that I may unceasingly 
magnify thee. 
Glory ..., Looking upon those sick in soul and body and cast into cruel 
sufferings, О Lady, and healing them in thy compassion, grant release to those 
who are now troubled by grief, that they may magnify thee with faith and love. 
Both now ..., The Son Whom the paternal Father begat from Himself made 
His abode within thy womb, becoming a perfect man, О Mother of God, and 
hath shown thee forth as a wellspring of grace for us who worship thine ineffable 
birthgiving with faith. 
Then, “It is truly meet . ...,” and a prostration. 
Trisagion through Our Father ..., And the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone II: 
О Christ God, Who in Thine ineffable love for mankind didst make fishermen 
wiser than rhetors, and send them forth as preachers throughout the whole world, 
for their sake make steadfast Thy Church, and send down Thy blessing upon the 
faithful, О Thou Who alone restest in the saints. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the end of the world. 
As disciples and eye-witnesses to the Wisdom of God, the divine apostles 
exposed the foolish wisdom of even the wisest rhetors as foolish, by the simplicity 
of their preaching making the nations wise, that they might hymn the only Creator 
and Lord in an Orthodox manner. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We magnify thee, О Theotokos, crying aloud: Rejoice, О cloud of the never-
setting Sun, who didst bear the Lord of glory within thy womb! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II: 
Fishing for the nations with the net of the Spirit, the fishermen taught the 
ends of the earth to worship Thee, and the Father and the Spirit, О Christ God. 
For their sake make steadfast Thy Church, and send down Thy blessing upon the 
faithful, О only Merciful Lover of mankind. 
Verse: The heavens declare Thy wonders, * О Lord. 
Fishing for the nations with the net of the Spirit ..., 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers of the Lord, blessed is the ground which 
was drenched in your blood, and holy the temples which have received your 
bodies; for ye rebuked the enemy at your trials, and preached Christ with bold-
ness. Entreat Him, in that He is good, we pray, that our souls may be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Through thee, O Ever-virgin Theotokos, * we have become partakers of the 
divine nature; * for thou hast given birth to God incarnate for our sake. ** 
Wherefore, as is meet we all reverently magnify thee.  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “The wellspring of thy loving-kindness ...”: 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having sent Thy disciples into the world as radiant beacons, О Word, Thou 
didst enlighten all the earth, delivering all mankind from the darkness of 
ignorance. Ever entreated by their supplications, О Lover of mankind, illumine 
my soul, which is in darkness, and save me. 
With rays of miracles, thou dost enlighten the whole world, dispelling the 
gloom of tribulations and repelling the attacks of misfortunes, О Nicholas, in that 
thou art a most fervent intercessor. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О most pure, holy and unwedded Theotokos, who knewest not wedlock, with 
the apostles ever beseech thy Son, to Whom thou hast given birth in the flesh in a 
manner transcending nature, that He grant unto all who hymn thee forgiveness 
offenses, correction of life and release from the passions. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy apostles, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
О radiant apostles of the Savior, who through faith became the lightning-bolts 
of the divine Light, enlighten me, who have wholly become darkened by the 
darkness of pleasures and have passed all my life in slothfulness. (Twice) 
О disciples and friends of Christ, deliver me who, because of mine affinity for 
evils, am become a friend of the enemy, and impel my soul toward the love of 
Him Who, in His goodness, hath loved the race of mankind. 
О my lowly soul, before my death hasten thou to repent, and weep for thyself, 
who hast been mortally slain, that He Who in His loving-kindness raised up 
Lazarus who was four days dead might raise thee up also, by the entreaties of the 
apostles. 
Theotokion: О most pure and immaculate one, who hast given birth to the 
good God Who doeth good unto all who are held fast by corruption: Entreat Him 
with the prophets, martyrs and apostles, that He deliver all from perils. 
Another canon, of the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, the 
acrostic whereof is ‘‘Accept my loving entreaty, О Nicholas,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought 
up out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ever standing before the divine throne of grace, О Nicholas, pray that grace 
and mercy be given to thy servants, who call upon thee with faith. 
On earth, God hath shown thee to be a great intercessor for the afflicted; 
wherefore, stand up for me day and night, preserving me from the temptations of 
the adversary. 
Knowing thee to be a daystar, О father Nicholas, let me be delivered by thy 
radiant beams from the darkness of temptations, from misfortunes and every sin. 
Theotokion: Deliver me from bodily pains; heal the indescribable sores of my 
soul; and rescue me from everlasting fire, О thou who alone art full of the grace 
of God. 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a 
lily * at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established. 
Having acquired the Wisdom of God as your Teacher through the Spirit, О 
saints, ye rendered foolish the wisdom of the pagans, О right wondrous beholders 
of God. (Twice) 
Loose ye the barrenness of my soul, О all-praised ones, and cause it to produce 
fruitful acts in the virtues, in that ye are right blessed eye-witnesses of the Word. 
By the supplications of Thine apostles, О greatly merciful Benefactor of all, 
heal me, who have now been grievously wounded by the venomous sting of the 
enemy. 
Theotokion: With all the apostles entreat the supremely good God, О most 
pure one, that we who honor thee may be delivered from every harm, evil 
circumstance and misfortune. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, who didst slay sin upon the Tree, * firmly establish us in 
Thee, * and in the hearts of us who hymn Thee * plant the fear of Thee. 
As thou art a wellspring of healings, О holy one, cure thou the passions of my 
soul and preserve my life, keeping me, thy servant, free from harm. 
Granting my mind recovery from defeat, О great Nicholas, as mine intercessor 
save me from the harm wrought by the enemies, visible and invisible, who wage 
war on me. 
He Who alone is good hath given thee to us as a good helper; wherefore, I 
beseech thee: Free me from all evils! 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, thou art my might, joy and gladness, a 
steadfast bulwark and intercessor, delivering me from temptations and 
misfortunes. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor 
as an angel, * but the very Lord Himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
О Thou Who alone lovest mankind, by the divine intercessions of the apostles 
who preached Thee throughout the world, nourish with the food of salvation me 
who am ever starving and famished by hunger. (Twice) 
Into the turbid seas of the world Thou didst ride all Thy glorious apostles like 
steeds, О Lover of mankind, roiling its salty waters of bitter unbelief. 
О all-famed apostles, who announced Christ the Sun to those in darkness, 
enlighten me who lie in the darkness of sin, and restrain the wicked thoughts of 
my heart. 
Theotokion: О all-hymned one who hast given birth to the all-hymned God, 
with the apostles pray for those who hymn thee, that we may be delivered from 
sins, misfortunes and afflictions. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly merciful One.  
Adorning thy cathedra with the virtues, О Nicholas, thou wast revealed to be a 
precious ornament of hierarchs; wherefore, I entreat thee: Make beautiful the 
ugliness of my soul, and save me from the temptations of the world. 
Smooth thou the way which leadeth to heaven, О most blessed one; let me 
ride lightly upon the waves of life; and steer me into the harbor of life, for I have 
been made rich by thee, the great intercessor, О Nicholas. 
О great Nicholas, who hearest words divine, hearkening unto my words 
deliver me from the temptations of the enemy, from iniquitous men, and from 
evil circumstances which beset me. 
Theotokion: О holy Lady Theotokos, sanctify me night and day, and preserve 
and guide me to salvation, for I have fallen into many sins and am brought low by 
the assaults of the demons. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
The great Shepherd sent you forth, His godly apostles, like sheep among 
wolves, transforming them by the divine grace of baptism and the goodness of 
your words. (Twice) 
With divine light ye illumined the hearts of those who languished in the 
darkness of delusion, О apostles; wherefore, I beseech you: Enlighten me who 
have been darkened by dark pleasures, О divinely blessed ones. 
О my wretched soul, before the end make haste and repent, crying out to the 
Lord: I have sinned against Thee, О Master! For the sake of the apostles forgive 
and save me, in that Thou art full of tender compassion. 
Theotokion: With thy light illumine me who lie in darkness, О abode of the 
Light, and with the apostles pray that by thy supplications He may deliver me 
from all need, О most immaculate one. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, Bestower of light and Creator of the ages: * guide us in the 
light of Thy commandments, * for we know none other God than Thee.  
O fulfiller of the law of God, entreat the good God, that I may observe the 
laws of God; and rescue me from the iniquitous foe and the harm wrought by the 
demons, О all-blessed Nicholas. 
As of old thou didst stand forth, delivering the three youths, О holy one, so 
now by thy supplications deliver me from every sin, О divinely wise Nicholas. 
О great wonderworker, sacred minister of Christ, surety of sinners: Entreat 
God, the Bestower of good things, that He not put me to shame at the hour of 
judgment. 
Theotokion: О pure one who hast given birth to the Lord, in that thou art 
good stand forth and deliver me who am beset by many passions, that, saved, I 
may hymn thee with soul, heart and tongue. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
In that ye bear the Water of life, О disciples of the Savior, give drink to my 
soul, which withereth away under the burning heat of sin, I pray. (Twice) 
As noetic heavens, О divinely radiant apostles, ye declared the ineffable glory 
of God. Pray ye that all of us may also receive it. 
Tempest-tossed on the cruel deep, I come to Thee Who art the Helmsman of 
all, О Christ. For the sake of Thine apostles pilot me to the harbor of salvation. 
Theotokion: With all the hosts on high, with the prophets, apostles and 
martyrs, entreat thy Son on our behalf, О Bride of God. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin ..., 
О Nicholas, primate of the people of Myra, with thy good works thou didst 
perfume the assemblies of the faithful. Deliver me from fetid transgressions. 
Having acquired a heart more brilliant than the sun, О father Nicholas, wholly 
enlighten me, dispelling the darkness of temptations and tribulations. 
As one possessed of the broad expanse of mercy, О Nicholas, deliver me from 
all straits, and strengthen me that I may walk the narrow path which leads to the 
Lord. 
Theotokion: Every hour I call upon thee, О most pure one, that I may find 
thee to be a helper rescuing me from all affliction and dreadful torments. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He 
is blessed and supremely exalted. 
Having first been ignited by the fire of the divine Spirit, О apostles, ye 
quenched the burning coals of delusion and enkindled the love of God in the 
minds of all the faithful; wherefore, we honor you out loud. (Twice) 
Ye hated the world and those things in the world, and ye loved Christ, Who in 
the world united Himself to the flesh of men. Him do ye beseech, О divine 
apostles, that He free me from all evils in this life. 
О righteous Judge Who knowest the hearts of all, Who alone knowest my 
secret offenses: At the hour of judgment condemn me not, neither send me into 
the fire, by the prayers of Thine apostles. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: Ineffably giving birth without knowing wedlock, thou wast not 
consumed by the fire of the Godhead, О Virgin; wherefore, О pure one, pray with 
the apostles that He free me, who glorify thee, from the everlasting flames. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: When the golden image was worshipped on the plain of Dura, * Thy 
three children spurned the impious command, * and, cast into the midst of 
the flame, * they were bedewed, and sang: * O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou!  
Every day I experience the fire of temptations, О father Nicholas; I pass 
among snares like a bird, and hasten under thy compassionate protection. 
Preserve me untouched by harm, entreating the good God and Lord. 
Swiftly hearkening to my words, О father Nicholas, hasten thou to come to 
the aid of me who am tempest-tossed by the tribulations and necessities of life 
and the affliction of the demons, that, saved, I may hymn thine intercession. 
О father Nicholas, who of old appeared in a dream to the emperor, delivering 
the innocent ones who were set to be executed, ever deliver me from the assaults 
which beset me, from sickness of body and pain of soul. 
Theotokion: Thee alone do I have as a helper, О most pure one; thee do I 
declare to be the preserver of the life of all. Disdain me not, thy servant, О thou 
who alone art the intercessor for the whole world, but save me who chant: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, 
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The Most Holy Spirit, in material form descending upon you in the guise of 
fire, made you torches burning up ungodliness and enlightening all the pious, О 
divine apostles of the Word. (Twice) 
О Compassionate One, I pray Thee: Heal my heart, which is tempest-tossed 
by the passions and is not set aright. And at the entreaties of Thine apostles, 
enlighten my soul, and direct my mind, which hath inclined unto evil. 
Sigh, О my soul, and shed tears in earnest, weeping for thyself before the end, 
lest inconsolable lamentation overtake thee; and cry out to the Lord: Save me, О 
Merciful One, by the prayers of Thine apostles! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: The furnace which once failed to burn the children prefigured thy 
birthgiving, О all-immaculate Virgin; wherefore, I beseech thee: With the apostles 
and all the prophets, pray that I be delivered from the fire of Gehenna. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew 
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and 
supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
О divinely wise father Nicholas, who received from God the authority to loose 
and to bind, by thy supplications loose the bonds of mine evils, and bind me to 
the divine love of the Master Who desired to become a man. 
Visit me day and night with thy divine presence, smoothing the way for my 
lowly soul, О holy Nicholas; and preserve me unwounded by the temptations of 
the evil one, which assail me. 
Grant me a hand to stretch forth for the help of God, and preserve me from 
the cruel expectation of the enemy, О Nicholas who once delivered the youths 
from a bitter death, that I may honor thee as my good intercessor. 
When Thou shalt sit on Thy dread throne to judge the world, О God, enter 
not into judgment with Thy servant, but, by the prayers of Nicholas, grant unto 
me the portion of the saved. 
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving, О Birthgiver of God, thou didst supra-
naturally magnify us who have been brought low by great and unimaginable evils. 
Wherefore, we pray to thee, О most pure one: Magnify thy rich mercies within us. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The Son of the beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath 
appeared to us incarnate of a virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and 
to gather the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we 
magnify 
О glorious apostles, blessed apostles, disciples of the Savior, all-wise preachers: 
Deliver me from all harm, from all wrath, from all sin, from every evil 
circumstance, and from divers perils. (Twice) 
By the prayers of Thine apostles, О Lord, return me who am condemned, who 
am incorrigible, who have ignored Thy precepts and, sick of mind, have followed 
the beguilements of the demons. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
I possess a soul which is incorrigible, a conscience buried under transgressions, 
a heart defiled and a sullied mind, О Lover of mankind, yet I cry unto Thee: For 
the sake of the apostles have pity on me in Thy mercy! 
Theotokion: О most pure one, the apostles preached thy Son: God and man: 
throughout the whole world; wherefore, with them make supplication, that those 
who magnify thee with faith may be delivered from torments on the dread day of 
judgment. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God the Word, God of God, * Who by ineffable wisdom came to 
create Adam anew * after his grievous fall to corruption through eating * 
and Who took flesh beyond all telling from the Holy Virgin for our sake, * 
Him we faithful with one accord magnify in song. 
I know thee to be a standard for the priesthood and model of meekness, О 
wise Nicholas. By thy supplications still thou the storm of passions and 
misfortunes which assail me all the days of my life, and keep me unharmed, О 
most sacred father. 
As a most sacred vessel deemed worthy of the divine Myrrh which is 
mercifully poured forth upon the earth, perfume the hearts of us all, О wise one 
who wast the chief hierarch of the people of Myra, dispelling the stench of 
temptation by thy supplications. 
Bring peace to my soul, which is sorely troubled by the invisible horde; and 
allay for me the countless temptations which the deceiver hurls at me day and 
night, and show thyself to be my good intercessor, О Nicholas. 
The dread day of the Master approacheth and draweth nigh. What then shalt 
thou do, О my soul, being possessed of a multitude of sins. Hasten thou before it 
is too late, and cry out earnestly to the Lord: Through the supplications of Thy 
holy hierarch Nicholas, save me! 
Theotokion: Spare me О Lord, spare me, when Thou shalt come to render 
judgment, and condemn me not to the fire, neither rebuke me in Thine anger; for 
the Virgin who gave Thee birth, the multitude of the apostles, and the glorious 
Nicholas entreat Thee, О Christ. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the apostles, in Tone II: 
Throughout the whole world Thou didst magnify the names of Thy 
preeminent apostles, О Savior, for they learned heavenly things and gave ineffable 
healings unto mortals. They who were fishermen healed diseases by their hand-
kerchiefs alone; they who were Jews theologized the doctrines of grace. For their 
sake, О Thou Who art full of loving-kindness, grant us great mercy. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
We, who are ever assailed by the actions of the unrighteous, yet truly find 
refuge in Thee, Who art God, offer unto Thee the voice of Thy disciples, saying: 
Save us, О our Instructor, for we are perishing! And we pray: Show now to our 
enemies that Thou dost protect and save them from misfortunes by the prayers of 
the apostles, overlooking their sins in Thy great goodness. О Lord, glory be to 
Thee! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: The multitude of Thy saints entreateth Thee, О Christ: Have 
mercy and save us, in that Thou lovest mankind! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
All of my hope I place in thee, О Mother of God; keep me under thy 
protection. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone II: 
We offer Thee the cry of the thief, and we pray: In Thy kingdom have mercy 
upon us, О Savior! 
Passing over the ends of the world, О most wise apostles, ye delivered all 
people from the darkness of delusion and impiety. 
With the net of grace ye wisely drew all mankind forth from the depths of 
vanity, О disciples of the Savior. 
To the martyrs: О ye faithful, together let us hymn the passion-bearers of the 
Lord, who finished the race and kept the Faith. 
Glory ..., Let us hymn the uncreated Trinity, preaching the Son, Who in 
activity is equal with the Father, and the Spirit. 
Both now ..., О most pure Virgin, thou art the boast of the apostles, the 
adornment of spiritual athletes and the salvation of the world. 
 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
  
