--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING: TONE II 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone II:  
Spec. Mel.: “When from the Tree ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
When Thou wast nailed to the Cross, О Savior, * the sun beheld and dimmed 
its rays in fear of Thee, * and the veil of the temple * was rent in twain; * the earth 
quaked, and the stones likewise * split asunder with trembling, * unable to bear 
the sight of their Creator and God * willingly suffering unjustly upon the Tree, ** 
and reviled by men. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Wholly cast down to the ground, * wholly wounded, * the most wicked 
serpent was brought low by a strange fall * when Thou, О Lover of mankind, * 
wast uplifted upon the Tree. * And Adam who before was condemned * was 
loosed from the curse and became saved. * Wherefore, we also pray: ** Save us 
all, О Compassionate One, and grant us Thy kingdom! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
When the Cross was set up * and Thou wast pierced in the side with the spear, 
* О Sinless Savior, * the sun hid itself, unable to bear the sight; * and when Thou 
wast reviled, * the earth trembled, and the rocks split asunder in fear; * and all 
creation cried out to Thee: * Glory be to Thy crucifixion whereby Thou hast 
saved all, ** О Word and Lover of mankind! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Beholding Thee О Jesus, * lifted up upon the tree of the Cross, * she who 
knew not wedlock wept and said: * “O my sweet Child, wherefore hast Thou 
forsaken me * who alone gave Thee birth? * О unapproachable Light of the 
beginningless Father, * hasten Thou and glorify Thyself, * that those who glorify 
Thy divine sufferings ** may receive divine glory!” 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
When the Virgin beheld Life dying upon the Tree, * His side painfully pierced 
by a spear, * she exclaimed, weeping: * “O my Son and God, * how hath the 
ungrateful assembly rewarded Thee? * Woe is me! * My womb, which did not 
suffer the pangs of childbirth, * is wracked with pain, ** beholding Thee suffering 
for them, О Master!” 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
When the maiden who knew not a man * beheld her Son taken down from the 
Tree, * plainly laid upon the ground, * as a man bereft of breath, * she clasped 
Him to her bosom * and, kissing His mouth and eyes, * exclaimed to Him in 
wonder: * “How can I be unmoved when I see Thee now, ** bereft of voice, Who 
givest life unto all?” 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * 
willingly led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now 
hasten to leave me childless who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that 
Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine 
extreme goodness, * which is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of 
mankind!”  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone II: 
О Christ God my Savior, Who saved Peter in the sea, save me by the power of 
the Cross, and have mercy on me. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
They who ever enjoyed Thy gifts cried aloud, “Crucify Him!”; they who slew 
the righteous ones asked that a malefactor be released unto them in place of the 
Benefactor. But Thou didst keep silence, О Christ, enduring their savagery, 
desiring to suffer and thus save us, in that Thou lovest mankind. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Having hated the pleasures of life, the passion-bearers were 
deemed worthy of the good things of heaven and have made their abode together 
with the angels. By their prayers, О Lord, have mercy and save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When iniquitous men raised Thee, the Life of all, up upon 
the Tree, О Savior, Thy pure and most immaculate Mother, standing forth and 
lamenting, exclaimed: “O my sweet Child, light of mine eyes, woe is me! How hast 
Thou suffered to be nailed to the Cross between two evildoers, О Thou Who hast 
suspended the earth upon the waters?” 
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
THURSDAY NIGHT: TONE II 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: In the deep of old the infinite Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole 
army. * But the Incarnate Word annihilated pernicious sin. * Exceedingly 
glorious is the Lord, * for gloriously hath He been glorified. 
God chose thee as beauteous, all-comely, immaculate among women, and 
made His abode within thine immaculate womb. Him do thou beseech, О all-
immaculate one, that He deliver all who hymn thee from the disgrace of sins. 
According to the psalm, thou dost stand as Queen at the right hand of the 
King Who shone forth from thy womb, О pure one. Him do thou beseech, О all-
immaculate one, that on the day of retribution He sets me to stand on the right 
side. 
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to the Rain of heaven, thou hast 
renewed the nature of man which hath become dry because of unseemly deeds; 
wherefore, I pray thee: Show forth the dry furrows of my soul to be fertile, О 
Bride of God. 
Both now ..., We who were slain by the tree of knowledge have been called to 
life everlasting by Christ God, the Tree of life, Who blossomed forth from thee, 
О pure one, in a manner transcending understanding. Entreat Him with boldness, 
that our souls be saved. 
ODE III 
Irmos: The desert of the barren Church of the nations * blossomed like a 
lily * at Thy coming, O Lord, * therein hath my heart been established. 
Issuing forth from thy womb, О most pure one, the Creator clothed Himself 
in me, a man, granting the raiment of incorruption to me who have been stripped 
naked by my manifold evil deeds. 
Thou hast given birth to the supremely honored Word of God, О Lady. Him 
do thou earnestly beseech, that He have pity on my lowly soul, which is beset by 
the indignity of pleasures. 
Glory ..., Heal thou the wounds of my soul, О most pure one, and with thine 
effective therapy cure my lowly heart, which hath been afflicted by the venom of 
the serpent. 
Both now ..., As thou hast boldness before thy Son, О Lady and Mother, beg 
help for thine oppressed people and cast down the arrogance of the iniquitous. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor 
as an angel, * but the very Lord Himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Let fall upon me a drop of compunction, О Lady, easing all the burning heat 
of my heart and dispelling my grief and the buffeting assaults. 
Disdain me not, who has been pierced by the sword of pleasure and lie in my 
wounds, О most pure one, but heal me with the spear and blood of thy crucified 
Son and our God. 
Glory ..., О thou who hast been enriched by all the edification of the Master, 
grant divine grace unto me who am grievously impoverished, that I may magnify 
thee as my good helper, О all-immaculate one. 
Both now ..., Christ, the Effulgence of the Father, shone forth from thy 
womb, О maiden who knewest not wedlock, and, crucified, hath enlightened the 
whole world, destroying the darkness of the demons. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ God Thou art a mediator between God and man; * for by 
Thee, O Master, * we have been led from the night of ignorance, * to Thy 
Father, the Source of light.  
О most pure one who hast given birth to the Way of life, direct me not to the 
narrow path, for unknowingly I have stumbled headlong into a trackless waste and 
the brink of grievous falls. 
Having mindlessly estranged myself from the understanding of God, I have 
lived prodigally, lost in the far country of the passions; yet, having brought me 
back, О pure Virgin, save me by thy consolation. 
Glory ..., With thy living waters give drink to thy servant who burns with the 
flame of sin and am consumed by the assaults of the demons, О most pure Virgin 
Mother. 
Both now ..., Lo! thou didst have Christ God in thy womb in a manner past all 
telling, О most pure Theotokos, as Isaiah proclaimed, and thou hast given birth to 
Him supra-naturally, О Birthgiver of God. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
Let me not be shown to be a delight for the demons at the judgment which is 
to come, О Lady, but directing upon me a gaze of reconciliation, entreat the 
Judge, thy Son. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having driven Thee away with my wicked thoughts and mine impure acts, О 
Lord, I bring before Thee Thy Mother to make supplication. Have pity and save 
me! 
Glory ..., From condemnation, О Lady, deliver me who have condemned 
myself through my transgressions, for thou hast given birth to the Judge and God 
of all, О all-hymned one. 
Both now ..., Beseech Jesus the Savior to Whom thou hast given birth supra-
naturally in the flesh, О most pure Virgin Mother, that thy servants be delivered 
from misfortunes. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone II: 
Spec. Mel.: “As thou art full of loving-kindness ...”: 
Thy Virgin Mother, beholding Thee, О Christ, stretched out dead upon the 
Tree, said, weeping bitterly: “O my Son, what is this strange mystery? How is it 
that Thou Who grantest life everlasting unto all dost of Thine own will die a 
shameful death upon the Cross?” 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He 
is blessed and supremely exalted. 
As thou art my strength and song, my salvation, firm help and invincible 
bulwark, О Lady, vanquish the demons which war against me, ever seeking to slay 
me. 
Giving flesh to God from thy virginal blood, О Virgin, thou hast deified 
mankind; wherefore, I pray thee: by thy prayers deliver me, who have been defiled 
by the passions and corrupted by the wiles of the enemy. 
Glory ..., The furnace prefigured thy birthgiving, О all-immaculate one, for it 
did not consume the children, just as the unbearable Fire did not consume thy 
womb. Wherefore, we entreat thee: Deliver thy servants from eternal fire. 
Both now ..., Remaining a virgin, thou alone didst show forth a most pure 
conception and an incorrupt birthgiving, for thou didst conceive Christ, Who is 
God over all and Who became a man, О pure one, for the salvation and 
deliverance of the faithful. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In Babylon, the activity of the fire was once divided, * for, by the 
command of God it consumed the Chaldeans, * but bedewed the faithful, 

--- PAGE 7 ---
who chant: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Be zealous for good works, О my soul, withdrawing from evils with care for 
godly acts, having the Theotokos praying for thee, the unashamed helper of all, in 
that she is merciful and loving. 
Thou hast broken the bonds of men’s ancient condemnation; wherefore, I 
beseech thee, O Birthgiver of God: Loose thou all the evil bonds of my heart, 
binding me with the divine love of the Creator, О most pure one. 
Glory ..., Having given birth to the Effulgence of the Father’s glory, О 
Theotokos, illumine my heart, which hath become downcast because of the 
infamy of my transgressions, and show me forth to share in everlasting glory, that 
I may glorify thee with faith. 
Both now ..., Through thee, О Birthgiver of God, hath the true Sun of 
righteousness been revealed to us, illumining all things with rays of divinity. Him, 
the Most High incarnate, do we hymn. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The Son of the beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath 
appeared to us incarnate of a virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and 
to gather the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we 
magnify 
Having tasted of the food mingled with death, Adam was seized by bitterness 
through the tree; but thy Son Who was nailed to the Tree, О most pure one, hath 
poured forth the sweetness of immortality. Wherefore, we praise thee* 
Thou art the Queen, having in a manner past all telling given birth to Christ, 
the King and Lord, Who hath destroyed the realm of death. Him do thou 
earnestly entreat, О maiden, that He grant the kingdom on high unto all who 
honor thee. 
Glory ..., As thou art the Mother of the good One and art wholly good, bless 
thou my lowly heart, which is oppressed by attacks of pleasure, and lead me 
through the portals of good unto repentance. 
Both now ..., Thou Who wast suspended aloft, dead, upon the Cross hast 
therewith slain the serpent. Wherefore, I cry out to Thee: Have mercy, О Word, 
upon my soul which hath been slain by my wicked deeds, and give life to it by the 
prayers of her who gave birth to Thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
And the rest as usual. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
the Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone II:  
Thou didst work salvation in the midst of the earth, О Christ God, and on the 
Cross didst stretch out Thy most pure hands, gathering to Thee all the nations, 
who cry: Glory to Thee, О Lord! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet, * 
for He is holy. 
Just as the enemy made Adam captive by the fruit of the tree, so didst Thou 
Thyself make the enemy captive by the tree of the Cross and Thy suffering, О 
Lord; for Thou camest as the Second Adam for this purpose: to seek out the lost 
and bring life to the dead. Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee, O Christ, stretched dead upon the tree, * 
Thy virgin Mother cried out with bitter tears: * O my son, what is this fearful 
mystery? * How dost Thou give eternal life to all, ** and yet suffer willingly a 
shameful death upon the Cross? 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II: 
The life-creating Cross of Thy goodness, which Thou hast given unto us, the 
unworthy, O Lord, do we offer unto Thee in supplication: Save Thy city, granting 
it peace for the sake of the Theotokos, О Thou Who alone lovest mankind. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
We bow down before Thy most pure image, О good One, asking forgiveness 
for our transgressions, О Christ God; for of Thine own will Thou wast well-
pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh, that Thou mightest deliver that which 
Thou didst create from slavery to the enemy. Wherefore, we cry out to Thee in 
thanksgiving: О our Savior, Thou hast filled all with joy when Thou camest to 
save the world! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Having Thee Who clothed the sky in clouds as their vesture in 
the world, the saints endured torments at the hands of the iniquitous, and 
abolished the deception of idolatry. By their supplications free us also from the 
invisible foe, О Savior, and save us. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing beside Thy Cross, * she who gave birth to thee 
without seed * could not endure seeing Thee unjustly suffering, * and cried aloud 
to Thee, * weeping and lamenting: * ‘O my sweetest son, how dost Thou suffer, * 
though Thou art dispassionate by nature? * I sing the praises of Thine extreme 
and compassionate goodness. 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone II: 
Like the thief do I confess and cry out to Thee, O good One: Remember me, 
О Lord, in Thy kingdom! Reckon me with him, О Thou Who didst willingly 
accept sufferings for our sake. 
О good Shepherd, Who hast enlightened mortals and summoned sinners by 
the Cross, cut me not off from Thy flock, but seek me out who am lost, О 
Master, and number me among Thy sheep, О Thou Who alone art good and the 
Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Guarded by the precious Cross of thy son, * O pure Lady 
Theotokos, * we easily turn away all the assaults of the enemy! * Therefore we 
rightly call thee blessed, * for thou art the mother of light ** and the only hope of 
our souls! 
Canon of the holy and precious Cross, the acrostic whereof is “When the 
Cross was planted, the deception of the demons fell,” the composition of 
Joseph, in Tone II:  
ODE I 
Irmos: Traversing dryshod the impassible, peculiar path in the sea, * Israel 
the chosen cried aloud: * Let us chant unto the Lord, * for He hath been 
glorified!  
Thou didst accept crucifixion, being ignominiously pierced with nails, О 
Word, desiring to honor all those who glorify Thy voluntary sufferings. 
Thou didst stretch out Thy hands upon the Cross, О Savior Who stretched 
out the sky like a skin, and didst thereby embrace the nations and those who 
glorify Thy voluntary sufferings. 
To the martyrs: Shouldering their cross, the passion-bearers earnestly followed 
the crucified Christ, conforming themselves to His divine sufferings. 
To the martyrs: Beholding your sufferings, the angelic hosts sang, but the 
multitude of the demons lamented, О victorious martyrs who gaze upon God. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: The word of the honorable prophet hath been fulfilled, for a 
sword pierced thy heart, О Lady, when thou didst see thy Son nailed to the Cross. 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Come, O ye people, * let us sing a song to Christ our God, * Who 
divided the sea, * and made a way for the nation * which He had brought 
up out of the bondage of Egypt; * for He hath been glorified.  
О maiden, who hast given birth to the Source of dispassion, heal me who am 
wounded by the passions, and rescue me from the everlasting fire, О thou who 
alone art full of divine joy. 
Deliver me from bodily illness, and cure the unseemly passions of my soul, 
and rescue me from everlasting fire, О thou who alone art full of the grace of 
God. 
I flee now beneath thy goodness, О most pure Virgin Mother: Deliver thy 
servant from pain of soul, from spiritually corrupting passions and everlasting fire. 
О Lady, thou art my fervent sanctuary: unto thee do I flee and am saved, and 
acquire salvation of soul. For thou canst save all, in that thou art the Mother of 
God. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith, * and my mouth hath 
been emboldened against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth when I 
sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more righteous than 
Thee, O Lord. 
Hanging upon the Tree, the incorrupt Grapes: Jesus, the Redeemer of our 
souls: exuded the divine sweetness which gladdeneth the hearts of all and which 
by grace taketh away the drunkenness of evil. 
Of Thine own will Thou wast raised up upon the Tree, О Jesus, and didst foil 
all the wicked schemes of the devil; and didst raise up mankind who had fallen 
into destruction through their depraved minds, О greatly Merciful One. 
To the martyrs: Enkindled by the fire of divine love, the valiant ones were 
undaunted by the fire and unafraid of death, trusting that they would receive gifts 
of immortality, endless joy and never-waning light. 
To the martyrs: Having dyed a most splendid robe in their own blood and 
clothed themselves therein, and holding the divine Cross in their hands like a 
scepter, the passion-bearers ever reign with the Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: The ranks of incorporeal beings honor thee, for thou, О maiden 
Bride of God, hast given birth to the incarnate Master Who by the Tree hath 
released all who were bound, and thereby bound the faithful to His love. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Thou hast established me on the rock of faith ..., 
Unto the King, Who is without beginning and Who had received flesh from 
thee, О Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth. Entreat Him as the Lover of 
mankind, that He save thy servant from all the tribulations and damnation which 
is to come. 
Resolve the perplexity of my heart, heal my wounds and rid me of festering 
corruption by thy divine power; and grant me a stream of compunction, О thou 
who hast given birth to the Source of everlasting life. 
O Birthgiver of God, heal my soul, which hath become sick through 
despondency and the assaults of the demons; grant tears of repentance to my 
heart, and plant therein the fear of my Master, О most pure one. 
Having wasted my life in slothfulness and defiled my heart with the passions, I 
come to thee in compunction of soul, О Lady, and pray: Have pity and save me, 
making me steadfast by models of repentance. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * nor 
as an angel, * but the very Lord Himself incarnate, * and didst save me, the 
whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord! 
Thou wast suspended upon the Tree, О Almighty, Who suspended the earth 
upon the waters; and, pierced in the side by a spear, Thou didst pour forth blood 
and water for the salvation of all. 
When Thy side was pierced, it healed my sickness; when thou wast smitten on 
the cheek by the hand of man, I received freedom; and by Thy tasting of gall, О 
Christ, we have been delivered from the sweet taste of the fruit in Eden. 
To the martyrs: Having been lashed by the whips of the deceiving serpent, ye 
heal the stripes of our hearts, ever pouring forth grace from the wellsprings of the 
Savior, О divine martyrs. 
To the martyrs: Bloodied by your wounds, stretched out upon crosses, and 
maimed, ye dealt a blow to the whole body of the enemy, О all-honored God-
seeing passion-bearers. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: The Most High became incarnate from thy most pure blood; and 
beholding Him, unjustly suspended upon the Tree, О most pure one, thou didst 
groan, weeping, and magnifying His tender compassion. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: I hymn Thee, O Lord, for I have heard report of Thee, * and I was 
afraid; * for Thou comest to me, seeking me who am lost. * Wherefore, I 
glorify Thy great condescension towards me, * O greatly merciful One.  
I truly hymn thee, О all-hymned one, who hast supra-naturally given birth to 
the all-hymned Word of God; and I pray: Heal the pangs of my lowly soul, and 
deliver me from grievous condemnation. 
Rain down upon us the riches of thy mercy, О Virgin, ending our infirmities 
and loosing the divers passions of our souls; and free my heart from the bonds of 
sin and from many pangs. 
I have defiled my soul with the passions; but do thou, who didst become the 
most pure dwelling-place of the Most pure One, О Birthgiver of God, cleanse me, 
guiding me to the light of repentance and rescuing me from the fire which is to 
come. 
Enlighten my mind, О most pure Lady, I pray thee; and still the waves of my 
passion-plagued heart, putting down carnal desires and leading me to the divine 
haven. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The burning Ember was revealed to Isaiah, * and the Sun hath 
shone forth from the Virgin's womb, * granting the enlightenment of the 
knowledge of God * to those who in darkness have gone astray.  
Having accepted the Cross in Thy tender compassion, О Master, Thou didst 
draw me forth from the abyss of evils, and by sitting with the Father Thou didst 
honor me, who of mine own will have become dishonored. 
Crowned with thorns, О Word who dost crown the whole world with fauna, 
Thou dost hew down the thorns of my passions at the root, planting the 
understanding of Thee within me. 
To the martyrs: Arrayed of your own will in the strength of your weakness, О 
holy martyrs, fortified, ye thereby destroyed the might of the demons. 
To the martyrs: Having struggled greatly upon the earth, О saints, ye have 
found great glory in the heavens, and deliver from great misfortunes us who 
honor you. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: He Who in the heavens is divinely borne upon the shoulders of 
the cherubim, and Who sat upon thine arm, О most pure one, truly delivered all 
from corruption when He was crucified. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the darkness 
of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten me with 
Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
О all-immaculate Lady Theotokos, who hast given birth to the hypostatic Life 
of all, enliven me who have been slain by the assaults and pursuit of the deceiver, 
that I may piously hymn thee, the all-hymned one. 
As the Virgin Mother of the Lamb and Shepherd, shepherd me whose conduct 
is unlawful, and grant that on the day of judgment I may be reckoned with the 
lambs on the right hand of God, that I may hymn thy saving grace. 
By thy supplications, О maiden, deliver me, I pray, from the darkness of the 
passions, from temptations caused by the assaults of the alien one, and from the 
everlasting torments which await sinners. 
О Bride of God, in whom dwelt the one divine Word Who enlighteneth the 
whole world: Shine upon me the radiance of true repentance, and illumine me 
with beams of salvation, dispelling the darkness of my passions by thine 
intercessions, I pray. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Master, hearkening unto the sound of entreaties * from a soul in 
pain, * do Thou deliver me from my grievous sins, * for Thou alone art the 
Cause of our salvation.  
Having given Thy shoulders over to stripes, Thy cheek to buffeting, and Thy 
face to spitting, О Savior, Thou didst save me who have sinned greatly against 
Thee in knowledge and in ignorance. 
Thou wast led like a lamb to the slaughter, О Christ my God, leading back to 
life those who had been slain by the poisonous bite of the noetic wolf. Glory to 
Thy crucifixion! 
To the martyrs: Observing the laws of the Master, the martyrs utterly rejected 
the iniquitous counsel of the violators of the law; and, dying, they received the life 
which is to come. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
To the martyrs: Having arrayed yourselves, rejoicing, against the adverse 
princes, О saints, ye vanquished them with the weaponry of God, and have 
received from Him crowns of victory. 
Theotokion: That He might deify mankind, О Virgin, God was born from 
thee, and crucified, and tasted death, by His Cross slaying him who of old brought 
death upon me. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, * I appeal to the unfathomable 
abyss of Thy compassion: * Raise me up from corruption, O God. 
I flee now unto thee, О all-hymned one. Save and preserve me by thy 
supplications; for whatsoever thou desirest, thou canst do, in that thou art the 
Mother of Him Who strengtheneth all. 
О Virgin Theotokos, save thy servant, who am tempest-tossed by the storm of 
griefs, and am overwhelmed by the battering of threefold waves. 
Grant thy loving-kindness unto me who am an object of pitilessness and 
malice; and rescue me from the retribution which lieth before me and from 
everlasting fire. 
О all-immaculate one who having conceived, hast given birth to the most pure 
Lamb Who taketh away the sins of the world, cease not to pray to Him, that He 
grant me the forgiveness of my sins. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant * fanned the roaring flame; * 
but Christ bedewed the God-fearing children with the Spirit, * therefore He 
is blessed and supremely exalted. 
When Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross, О Word Who art the resurrection 
and uplifting of all, Thou didst raise me up who had fallen through disobedience; 
casting down the adversary who caused me to fall, and showing him to be wholly 
impotent and dead. Glory to Thy dominion! 
By Thy nails Thou didst transfix the sins of our forefather; and, beaten with 
the reed, thou didst sign a writ of emancipation for all mankind. Glory be to Thy 
suffering, whereby we have been delivered from the darkness of the passions! 
To the martyrs: The right victorious great martyrs of Christ were dismembered 
by the hands of vile murderers, yet in spirit they remained inseparable from God, 
felling and slaying the deceiving enemy with the sword of valor. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
To the martyrs: Possessed of the invincible might of the crucified Christ, the 
invincible army utterly destroyed the army of perdition; and, having suffered, they 
received crowns of victory and a blessed life which cannot be destroyed. 
Theotokion: О Virgin, thou wast shown to be the animate palace of the King 
and the fiery throne, on which, having sat, He raised all up from the primal fall 
and honored them by sitting with the Father. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: The godless order of the lawless tyrant ..., 
О pure one, who for us hast given birth to the hypostatic Life Who clearly 
destroyed death by His death, slay thou the passions of my soul, and grant me a 
fountain of tears, that I may ever glorify thee. 
Hope unashamed, a certain trust, an unassailable rampart, protection and 
helper, О all-immaculate one, be thou unto me who set my hope on thee; and 
guide me to the light of repentance and compunction, О pure one. 
That thy servant may be delivered from all the evil of the demons, from grief 
and damnation, and from everlasting fire, entreat thy Son, that I may ever glorify 
thee with faith. 
Thou alone hast been shown to be the one whose conception was most pure 
and whose birthgiving was incorrupt, such that thou didst remain a virgin; for 
thou didst conceive Christ, the God of all, Who became a man, О pure one, for 
the salvation and deliverance of the faithful. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Disdaining the golden image, the thrice-blessed children, * 
beholding the immutable and living image of God, * chanted in the midst 
of the flame: * Let all existing creation hymn the Lord * and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages!  
Disobedient men, who lacking compunction wrought all manner of iniquities, 
raised up upon the Tree between two malefactors Thee, Who dost justify sinners, 
crucifying Thee, О Compassionate One; but all creation glorifieth Thee as Lord 
and Master, hymning Thy long-suffering. 
Nailed to the Tree, Thou didst bloody Thy fingers, О Christ, and Thou didst 
bring an end to the blood sacrificed of old to the demons unto the damnation of 
those who offered it up. Wherefore, all creation glorifieth Thee, hymning Thy love 
for mankind, О God of all. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
To the martyrs: The immeasurable quantity of your blood quenched the fire of 
ungodliness and did away with the delusion of pagan polytheism, О saints; 
illumining all the faithful, who chant: Let all creation hymn the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Theotokion: The unblemished Ewe-lamb, the adornment of the prophets and 
martyrs, beholding Thee lifted up upon the Tree like a lamb, О Word Who art 
without beginning, wept bitterly and said: “Let all existing creation hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages!” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew 
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * and 
supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
О most pure Virgin, refuge and helper of Christians, disdain me not who am 
surrounded by evils and am ever beset by misfortunes and the many onslaughts of 
the wicked demons. 
Forget not the cry of those who pray to thee, О awesome intercessor, but by 
thine intercessions rescue them from all pain and every threat; for thy maternal 
supplications incline God to mercy. 
Still now the tempest of my passions, О pure and blessed maiden, and 
vanquish all the incorporeal foes who pitilessly assail my poverty, that I may hymn 
thee with faith. 
At the hour of mine end, О only Birthgiver of God, intercessor for the 
faithful, rescue me from the furnace of temptations, the flame of sins and the fire 
of the passions, from Gehenna and the assaults of the demons. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Every tongue is at a loss to praise thee as is due: * even a spirit from 
the world above is filled with dizziness, * when it seeketh to sing thy 
praises, O Theotokos. * But since thou art good, accept our faith: * Thou 
knowest well our love inspired by God, * for thou art the Protector of 
Christians and we magnify thee. 
Of old, Isaac was bound, that he might provide an image of Thy suffering; and 
as a symbol of remission Abraham freed the lamb who was caught in the thicket, 
releasing a truly involuntary sacrifice. But Thou wast willingly sacrificed, Thou 
didst thereby free us from evils. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Glory to Thy loving-kindness, О only loving Lord Christ, Who art comely in 
beauty more than the sons of men, yet wast bereft of form and beauty when Thou 
wast hung upon the tree of the Cross, transforming the ugliness of the whole race 
of mankind into beauty! 
To the martyrs: Ye were shown to be divine inhabitants of the heavenly Sion 
and fellow citizens equal in honor with the angels, О martyrs; and ye illumine with 
splendor the Church of the firstborn, О saints, shining with divine light, and 
wearing your torments as crowns. 
To the martyrs: О holy martyrs and beloved friends of the Lord Who most 
gloriously loved you: Deliver me from the friendship of the deceiver, which is of 
the flesh; and ask that sanctification, enlightenment and the remission of 
transgressions be given to all who keep your memory. 
Theotokion: The beauty of the heavenly spheres left their usual course when 
they beheld Thee, the Sun of righteousness, willingly lifted up upon the Cross; and 
with the virginal disciple the Virgin exclaimed, weeping and crying aloud: “Woe is 
me! What is this strange sight?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The Son of the beginningless Father, God and Lord, * hath 
appeared to us incarnate of a virgin, * to enlighten those in darkness, * and 
to gather the dispersed; * therefore the all-hymned Theotokos do we 
magnify 
In a manner transcending understanding and all telling thou hast given birth to 
the only greatly merciful Lord and Lover of mankind. Him do thou beseech, О 
Virgin, that at the dread hour of judgment He deliver thy servant from everlasting 
fire. 
О Bride of God, from heaven grant remission of evil unto us who hymn thee, 
who glorify thee with faith, and ever hasten to thy divine protection; and deliver 
us from the despotic passions, from torments and judgment. 
The fruit of sin which brought death upon me was beautiful to behold, yet 
most bitter to taste; yet because I ate of it to satiety, I await the dread judgment. 
But rescue me therefore, О most holy Virgin Mother. 
In that thou didst bear the good One and art wholly good, О most pure one, 
bless my lowly heart, which hath been restrained by the bars of pleasures; and lead 
me through the beautiful doors of repentance. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone II: 
О Christ God, Thou hast shown the tree of Thy Cross to be a tree of life for 
us who believe on Thee; and thereby hast Thou abolished the dominion of death 
and brought life unto us who have been slain by sin. Wherefore, we cry out to 
Thee: О Lord, Benefactor of all, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Having willingly impoverished Thyself for the sake of Adam’s poverty, О 
Christ God, Thou didst come to earth and become incarnate from the Virgin; and 
accepted crucifixion, that Thou mightest free us from slavery to the enemy. Glory 
be to Thee, О Lord! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Having suffered like Christ even unto death, О passion-
bearing martyrs, your souls are in heaven, in the hand of God, and your relics are 
venerated throughout the world. The priests bow down, and all of us, the people, 
cry aloud, rejoicing: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When the unblemished ewe-lamb beheld her Lamb * 
willingly led as a man to the slaughter, * she said, weeping: * “Dost Thou now 
hasten to leave me childless who gave Thee birth O Christ,? * What is this that 
Thou hast done, O Redeemer of all? * Even so I will hymn and glorify Thine 
extreme goodness, * which is beyond understanding and all telling, ** O Lover of 
mankind!”  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE II 
AT LITURGY  
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone II: 
We offer Thee the cry of the thief, and we pray: In Thy kingdom have mercy 
upon us, О Savior! 
Thou didst uproot the thorns of evil when of Thine own will Thou didst wear 
the crown of thorns, О long-suffering Master. 
When Thou wast crucified on Golgotha, О Sinless One, Thou didst crush the 
head of the serpent and save all mankind. 
To the martyrs: Broken, О martyrs, ye broke all the power of the enemy and 
have received crowns of victory. 
Glory ..., Enlightened by the sprinkling of the divine Blood, we, the faithful, 
honor the one Godhead in three Hypostases. 
Both now ..., Beholding Christ hanging like a lamb upon the Tree, the all- 
immaculate one, lamenting and weeping, magnified Him. 
 
On Friday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the 
footstool of His feet, for He is holy.  
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
 
Communion Verse: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, 
O God. 
  
