--- PAGE 1 ---
TONE THREE 
ON SATURDAY EVENING 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera: 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone III: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been 
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved by 
faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee.  
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been 
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved by 
faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
By Thy Resurrection, O Lord, * the universe hath been filled with light * and 
paradise hath been opened again, * while all creation, singing Thy praise, ** each 
evening offers hymns unto Thee. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
I glorify the power of the Father and the Son, * and I praise the authority of 
the Holy Spirit, * undivided, uncreated Godhead, * consubstantial Trinity, ** that 
reigneth from ages to ages. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
O Greatest wonder: * a Virgin today giveth birth, * and that which is born is 
God before the ages. * Having revealed Thine ineffable birthgiving, * clearly that 
which was accomplished was beyond nature. * O fearsome mystery! * What was 
apprehended remaineth ineffable, * and that which was contemplated remaineth 
incomprehensible. * Blessed art thou, O most pure maiden, * daughter of Adam 
the earthborn, * and revealed as the Mother of the Most High. ** beseech Him 
that our souls be saved.  
Then “O Joyous Light ...,”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,”:  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone III: 
By Thy Passion, O Christ, * Thou didst darken the sun, * and by the light of 
Thy Resurrection * Thou hast made the whole universe radiant. * We beseech 
Thee to accept our evening hymn, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation. 
O pure Virgin, * we know thee to be the spiritual ark * who for us bore the 
Tablets written by God, * the Lawgiver and Creator. ** Intercede with Him that 
our souls may be saved. 
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget 
thine own people and thy father’s house. 
God the Word, who is by nature beyond understanding, * and who dwelt in 
thy womb taking flesh from thee, * hath revealed thee to be heaven upon earth, O 
pure Virgin, * wherefore thou, who knewest not wedlock, ** doth bedew all with 
immortal dew. 
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance. 
By thine intercessions we have gained salvation, * because through them, O 
Virgin, we ever escape from dangers * and the tempests of temptations, * 
wherefore we entreat thee, ** cease not to intercede on our behalf, that our souls 
may be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Through thee, O Mary most pure, * we have come to know regeneration * and 
a second life for our human nature: * for the Maker of creation who hath been 
kneaded within thy womb * and who hath raised us up from death and Hades, * 
hath granted us eternal life, * wherefore we cry out to thee, O Ever-virgin; * 
“Rejoice!, thou who hast joined together things below with those of heaven. * 
Rejoice!, the hope of all the ends of the earth, * our protection and intercession. * 
Rejoice!, thou who by the Resurrection of thy Son * maketh all things radiant ** 
granting unto the world His great mercy.” 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III: 
 Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought 
might with His arm, * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born 
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world 
great mercy. 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
And the Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the 
saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank. 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone III: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
By Thy Cross, O Christ our Savior, * the dominion of death hath been 
abolished, * the devil’s deception hath been dispelled, * while mankind, saved by 
faith, ** each evening offers hymns unto Thee. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
By Thy Resurrection, O Lord, * the universe hath been filled with light * and 
paradise hath been opened again, * while all creation, singing Thy praise, ** each 
evening offers hymns unto Thee. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
I glorify the power of the Father and the Son, * and I praise the authority of 
the Holy Spirit, * undivided, uncreated Godhead, * consubstantial Trinity, ** that 
reigneth from ages to ages. 
Other Stichera, by Anatolius: 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
We worship Thy precious Cross, O Christ, * and we praise and glorify Thy 
Resurrection, ** for by Thy wounds we have all been healed. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
We praise the Savior who took flesh from the Virgin; * for he was crucified for 
us and arose on the third day, ** granting unto us His great mercy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Descending down unto those in Hades, * Christ proclaimed the good tidings, 
exclaiming, * “Be of good cheer; for now I have conquered! * I am the 
Resurrection; * I shall raise you up, ** abolishing the gates of death.” 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
We who stand unworthily in Thy most pure house * chant an evening hymn, * 
crying from the depths, * “O Christ God, who hath enlightened the world by Thy 
Resurrection on the third day, ** deliver Thy people from the hand of Thine 
enemies, O Lover of mankind.” 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion Dogmatic: 
How can we, O all-honored one, * not marvel at thine Offspring? * Who is 
both God and man. * For without knowing a man, O all-immaculate one, * 
without a father thou hast given birth to a Son in the flesh, * who without a 
mother was begotten from the Father before all ages, * yet in no way undergoing 
change, fusion or separation, * but preserving fully the characteristics of both 
natures. * Wherefore, O Sovereign Lady, and Virgin Mother, * beseech Him to 
save the souls of those ** who with Orthodox faith confess thee to be the true 
Theotokos.  
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III: 
By Thy Passion, O Christ, * Thou didst darken the sun, * and by the light of 
Thy Resurrection * Thou hast made the whole universe radiant. * We beseech 
Thee to accept our evening hymn, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
O Gracious Lord, Thy life-bearing rising hath enlightened the world, * and 
reclaimed Thine own fashioned after Thine image, * which had become corrupt. * 
And so, delivered from the curse of Adam, we cry aloud, ** “O all-powerful Lord, 
glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
Howbeit, as God Thou art unchangeable, * yet by Thy suffering Thou hast 
undergone change in the flesh, * and creation, unable to bear seeing Thee hanging 
upon a Cross, * was shaken with fear, * groaning as it sang the praise of Thy long-
suffering; * and having descended into Hades, Thou didst arise on the third day, 
** granting to the world life and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days. 
In order to ransom our race from death, O Christ, * Thou didst suffer death; * 
and arising on the third day from the dead * Thou hast raised with Thyself those 
who acknowledged Thee as God, * and Thou hast enlightened the world. ** O 
Lord, glory be to Thee! 
 Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
By the will of the Father and without seed * thou didst conceive through the 
divine Spirit the Son of God * Who hath existed from the Father without a 
mother from before the ages, * and Who for our sake came forth from Thee in 
the flesh without a father, * and Him hast thou suckled as a babe. * Wherefore, 
cease not to beseech Him, ** that our souls be delivered from tribulations. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then: 
Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, Full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, ** 
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...,” 
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast 
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O 
Theotokos and Virgin ...,” (Twice), and the Troparion of the feast (Once). 
And the Dismissal. 
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once): 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III: 
 Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought 
might with His arm, * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born 
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world 
great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone III: 
 We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin 
Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the 
flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He 
is the Lover of mankind. 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
SATURDAY NIGHT: TONE III 
AT COMPLINE  
 
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee, 
our God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord, 
have mercy (12 times). Glory ..., Both now ..., O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice). 
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, O God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto 
helping me...); and Psalm 142 (O Lord, hear my prayer...). Then, Glory to God in 
the highest..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God...). 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos, in Tone III 
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
With pure hymns, O most pure Bride of God, we, the faithful, crown thee as 
her who, through the divine Spirit and at the good pleasure of the Father, wast 
revealed to be the Mother of God; and with the archangel we greet thee with 
hymns, unto our salvation. 
Of old, Eve was formed from the side of Adam by God’s creative action, and 
Christ, Who is our God, appeared out of the womb of the Theotokos and became 
immutably man: the Pre-eternal came under time. 
Glory ..., He Who is our God condemned the womb of Eve to give birth amid 
grief and pain, yet He made His abode within thy womb, appeared in the flesh in a 
manner past all telling, and loosed the debt of our first mother. 
Both now ..., Having fallen, heavy laden, into the abyss of despair, O 
Birthgiver of God, we earnestly cry out to thee: O Lady, help us who are 
drowning because of our deeds of wicked transgression! For thee alone do we 
have as our hope after God. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
The staff of Aaron, which blossomed forth without being watered, showed 
thee forth, O most pure Theotokos, who without seed hast given birth to God 
Who became incarnate without undergoing change. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
In the Spirit, O most pure one, the prophet foresaw thee as a lampstand 
bearing the divine Fire, conveying sweet fragrance and life everlasting to those in 
the world. 
Glory ..., Let us approach the archangel Gabriel, in hymns declaring to the 
Theotokos: Rejoice! for through thee the curse of our first parents’ condemnation 
hath been loosed! 
Both now ..., Having thee as a bulwark of salvation, O most holy Theotokos, 
we sinners are saved. O Lady, disdain not, neither spurn thou our supplications! 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
Of old, Habbakuk, perceiving thee with divine vision, O most pure one, 
proclaimed thee to be the noetic mountain, the tabernacle of the virtues, for the 
Word Who came forth from the south received flesh from thee. 
In the Spirit Daniel beheld thee as a great and unquarried mountain, revealing 
the purity of thy virginity as remaining inviolate, O Lady, from whom Christ the 
Word, the Rock, was cut, casting down the falsehood of idolatry. 
Glory ..., David foretold thee to be a wondrous and rich mountain; for the 
only-begotten Son of the Father was well-pleased to make His abode within thee, 
in the flesh. Wherefore, in the Spirit we cry out to thee: Rejoice! 
Both now ..., As thou art the wholly good and fervent intercessor for the sinful 
and lowly, O most pure Lady and Birthgiver of God, save Thy servants from 
misfortunes, sorrows and sins. 
ODE V 
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have 
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the 
King of peace.’ 
The Virgin Mary, the rod of Jesse, without seed, through the divine Spirit of 
the Father, put forth the never-fading Blossom of the beginningless God, Who 
hath dominion over the mighty kingdoms of the nations, and upon Whom the 
gentiles set their hope. 
Taking flesh from thee, O Theotokos, the Prince of peace hath come to reign 
upon the throne of David. O the wonder! He hath shown thee to be the Queen 
who gave birth to Him Who set warfare at naught, striking down the princes of 
Moab. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Revealing thine immaculate goodness, through which Christ was clad 
in the flesh without seed, O Virgin, Isaiah cried out, exclaiming: The Lord of glory 
cometh upon a light cloud, and dispelling the darkness of delusion, He hath 
bestowed light upon us! 
Both now ..., Having conceived by the Holy Spirit the Word Who is 
consubstantial with the Father, O Virgin, thou hast given birth to Him in two 
natures, perfect God and perfect man. His manifestation in the flesh do we honor 
with faith. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 
In hymns the most wise one described thee beforehand, O all-hymned one, as 
the couch whereon God, Who was hypostatically incarnate from thee, did rest; 
and He Who was born from thee without commingling hath glorified thee. 
O all-hymned Virgin, as one chosen thou didst become the chosen vesture of 
the Word, for, taking flesh from thee as it were a robe of divine purple, He hath 
reigned, arrayed in majesty. 
Glory ..., O Bride of God, thou didst become the receptacle of the divine 
Union, more lustrous than gold; for through thee God became a man and 
conversed with mankind as a man. 
Both now ..., The evil of heresy hath brought death upon those who refuse to 
honor thee, O all-hymned Virgin; for in their malice they hide at the sight of the 
most glorious likeness of thine image. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
In the fervor of faith I cry out to thee with unworthy lips and a defiled heart, 
O Theotokos: Save me who am drowning in sins! Take pity on one who is slain by 
despair, that, saved, I may cry aloud to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, thou help of 
Christians! 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having been united conformably and been revealed to be incorrupt, the bush 
and the flame manifestly show thee forth, O Virgin; for thou hast given birth to 
God, yet remained a virgin. 
The fleece and the dew, shown forth in change, prefigured thy birthgiving for 
Gideon; for thou alone hast borne the divine Word in thy womb, as though He 
were rain, O Virgin Mother. 
Glory ..., The fire of my sin created a flame surpassing that of Gehenna for 
me, O pure one. By thy mercy do thou quench it, guiding me to the light by 
repentance. 
Both now ..., Venerating the appearance of thy countenance as the primal 
image, O most pure Theotokos, we all have thee as a helper and a right effective 
protection before God forever. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace burnt not the children, * neither did the fire 
of the Godhead consume the Virgin, * wherefore with the faithful children 
we cry aloud: * 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord'. 
Finding thee as an all-radiant lily amid thorns, shining with the splendor of 
beauty through the divine Spirit, the Father desired thee, the Bride who knew not 
wedlock, as a habitation for His Son. 
Without hesitation I manifestly glorify thee, the most immaculate Virgin, as 
more holy than the host on high; for thou didst bear in thy womb their Creator, 
Who in an uncommingled union received flesh from thee. 
Glory ..., Having preserved thy virginity intact, O Virgin, thou wast truly 
shown to be the Mother of the Son of God, becoming a Bride through the 
Father’s good pleasure and the incorrupt receptacle of the Spirit of glory. 
Both now ..., God Who is immaterial and invisible by nature was ineffably and 
supra-naturally born as a man from the holy Virgin, becoming visible, two natures 
in a single Hypostasis, wherein He is seen and depicted. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly 
passes through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and 
God bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. * 
As ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her. 
A holy fruit sprang forth from the holy root of the barren and sanctified one: 
the maiden Theotokos who, by the law of God the Father, hath blossomed forth 
never-withering and perfecting Life. And Anna rejoicing, receives in her old age a 
babe, the Mother of God, whom we glorify. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
New and godly is the birthgiving of thy holy and God-bearing womb, O pure 
one; for therein the incarnate holy Son was depicted in human image by the finger 
of the Father and by the Holy Spirit. Him do we magnify as both God and man 
without commingling. 
Glory ..., All judgment crieth out against me, for the deeds of my sinful actions 
lift up their voice to forbid me, and my whole soul knoweth those things whereby 
it will be condemned, and it trembleth before the flame of Gehenna. O Lady, 
before the end, from which do thou deliver me by thy prayers. 
Both now ..., After giving birth thou wast shown to be incorrupt, O pure one, 
for in a manner transcending nature, O Theotokos, thou hast given birth 
immutably to the Creator of all as a man in the flesh, though He was not 
separated from the essence of the Father; and through the divine Spirit thou didst 
remain a virgin. Wherefore, glorifying thee, we lift our voices in hymnody. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT NOCTURNS 
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...,” and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee, 
our God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King... Trisagion through Our Father... Priest: 
For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 times), 
Glory..., Both now..., O come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have mercy on 
me, O God ...,) 
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof 
is “I hymn Thee, O Trinity, the One Godhead,” the composition of Metrophanes, 
in Tone III: 
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Refrain: O Most Holy Trinity our God, glory to Thee! 
O sole unapproachable Dominion, Thou one Godhead of the Trinity, grant 
me Thy thrice-radiant light, that I may hymn Thee Who art unceasingly hymned 
with thrice-holy hymns by the angels. 
All the immaterial ranks hymn Thee in sanctity as the one creative, thrice-
radiant and clearly originate Cause; and with them we, the multitudes of peoples, 
likewise hymn and faithfully glorify Thee with our mouths of clay. 
Glory ..., In symbolic manner the theologians fittingly call Thee Mind, and 
Word and Spirit, signifying the dispassionate begetting of the Son from the 
unbegotten Father, as well as the procession of the divine Spirit, O God Who art 
the sole Source of all. 
Both now ..., Having assumed human nature in that by nature Thou lovest 
mankind, O Word of God, Thou didst shine forth the trinitarian Light of the one 
Godhead, which is the sole and only Source, pointing out to all the most pure and 
most glorious Virgin who gave birth to Thee. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
Elijah of old, having commanded that water be poured forth on the split 
wood, mystically manifested the trinitarian Hypostasis of the one divine 
Dominion. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
The corrupt nature of mortals hymneth Thee, the one, thrice-radiant and 
immutable Creator; and cries out unto thee, O Master: Deliver and save me from 
every manner of uncertainty. 
Glory ..., Uttering the same words as the prophets, the glorious apostles and 
the preachers of the Faith, we, the faithful, glorify Thee, the Trinity equal in 
activity, O God of all. 
Both now ..., Through thee, O most pure one, Christ descended from His 
exalted throne, elevating mankind, in that He is the Lover of mankind; and He 
hath shone forth the three-sunned Light upon all. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice) 
Sessional Hymns, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
O Christ, our only transcendent Lord, Scion of the beginningless Father, and 
Thou, O most divine Spirit, have mercy upon Thy servants: for we all have 
sinned, yet have we not turned away from Thee. Wherefore, we beseech Thee, O 
Lord in three Hypostases: In that Thou hast authority, save Thy creation from 
every evil circumstance. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
In His goodness, the transcendent God and Lord became incarnate from thee, 
assuming our essence; and He dwelt among us. Wherefore, honoring His divine 
manhood, we proclaim thee to be the Theotokos O all-pure one who knew not 
wedlock, glorifying the supreme wonder of thy seedless birthgiving. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
A double branch sprouted forth from the Father, as from a root: the Son and 
the upright Spirit, consubstantial offshoots divinely planted, blossoms equally 
without beginning. For there are the three Lights of the Godhead. (Twice) 
Glory ..., The multitudes of noetic intelligences unceasingly hymn thee, the 
inconceivable God; and with them we render glory, saying: O transcendent 
Trinity, save Thy servants, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
Both now ..., Thou hast set us afire with Thy love, O greatly merciful Word of 
God Who for our sake became incarnate without undergoing change, mystically 
teaching us about the one thrice-radiant Godhead. Wherefore, we glorify Thee. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have 
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the 
King of peace.’ 
When Isaiah mystically beheld God, the one Sovereign Lord, glorified in three 
Hypostases by the most pure voices of the seraphim, whereupon he was 
straightway sent to proclaim the thrice-radiant Essence, the three-sunned Unity. 
(Twice) 
Glory ..., O three-sunned Unity Who in the beginning created the essence of 
all things, visible and invisible, out of nothing, and Who hast delivered from all 
temptations those who with faith hymn Thee as the one God: grant unto us Thy 
glory. 
Both now ..., With love we hymn and bless thee, O Virgin, Who hast become 
the radiant and pure bridal chamber of God; for from thee Christ Who is one of 
the Trinity and the Lord of glory, was born in two natures and wills. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 
As a sojourner, Abraham was deemed worthy to mystically to receive the one 
Lord in three Hypostases, made manifest in the forms of men. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Guide the hearts of Thy servants to the unapproachable light, O 
three-sunned Lord, and grant the effulgence of Thy glory unto our souls, that we 
may be illumined by Thine ineffable goodness. 
Both now ..., Open unto me the portals of the light of Him Who was born of 
thy womb, O most pure one, that I may behold the thrice-brilliant rays of His 
divinity and glorify thee, O most radiant Lady. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice) 
Sessional Hymns, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
We hymn the three-sunned Dominion of the consubstantial divine nature, and 
with thrice-holy voices we cry: Holy art Thou, O beginningless Father! Holy art 
Thou, O equally-beginningless Son, and Thou, O Holy Spirit, O our only God 
Who art indivisible, O Creator of all, Who lovest mankind! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O supreme wonder! How did the infinite One come to be contained within 
thy womb, and become incarnate, and appear as a man, without enduring change 
or separation from the divine and immutable Divinity, O all-pure maiden? 
Wherefore with faith, we ever proclaim and glorify thee, the Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the 
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us 
who cry to Thee, * ‘Blessed art Thou, the God of our fathers!’ 
Through Thy light-giving radiance, O Master, show me to be a splendid 
temple of Thy thrice-radiant Godhead, far above the cruel darkness of sin and the 
passions. Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers! 
We proclaim the one face of the Godhead in three Hypostases and individual 
characteristics: the Father, the Son and the Spirit; crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, 
the God of our fathers! 
Glory ..., Of old, God in three Hypostases appeared to Abraham at the Oak of 
Mamre, mercifully giving him Isaac as a reward for his hospitality. Him do we 
now glorify as the God of our fathers. 
Both now ..., The Creator of all appeared on earth, divinely becoming a man 
through thy virginal and all-pure womb; and He hath deified us, O blessed, all-
pure and most pure Theotokos. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
The Word and the Spirit Who are equally without beginning came from the 
root of the beginningless Father, and as offshoots of the transcendent Godhead 
they have shown forth the one glory and power of the Trinity, Whom all of us, 
the faithful, hymn forever. (Twice) 
Glory ..., By Thine effulgences Thou dost direct the ranks of heaven to 
continually chant thrice-holy divine hymns to the thrice-radiant Dominion, equal 
in power, O Father, O Word of like form with Him, and Thou, O Spirit. 
Wherefore, we hymn Thee throughout all ages. 
Both now ..., Perceiving thy birthgiving from afar, the sayings of the prophets 
praised it as being without seed, O Theotokos, and praised Him Who was born 
from thee in a manner transcending nature, O Lady. And with them, we also sing 
to Him as Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly 
passes through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and 
God bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. * 
As ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
The God-beholding ranks of the incorporeal ones desire to mount on high 
with their wings, to see clearly the thrice-radiant glory; yet they are in exceeding 
great awe of the unapproachable Light, and unceasingly cry out hymns. And 
together with them we glorify Thee, the only Trinity. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Having received from Thee a noetic and reason-endowed soul with 
insatiable love, O Master, God of all, with our whole heart we hymn Thee, Who 
art truly the one Essence, the trinity of Hypostases. Wherefore, as Thou art greatly 
merciful, O compassionate One, have pity on us. 
Both now ..., Show me to be a splendid temple of Thy thrice-radiant Godhead 
Which alone is the source of all, that I may serve Thee, the Creator of all, in 
purity, and noetically behold Thine ineffable glory: through the supplications of 
the only Theotokos, whom we fittingly magnify as most glorious. 
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite:  
(which is chanted every Sunday after the canon) 
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim 
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we 
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day. 
With divine songs let us all in a godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and 
the Spirit divine, the one Might in three Hypostases, the Sovereignty and 
Dominion. 
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in 
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all. 
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable 
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity. 
I worship God: the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without 
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified 
Essence, the threefold Unity. 
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, O my God in three 
Hypostases, Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and 
immutable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory. 
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who ineffably became 
incarnate of the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and the 
angelic armies glorify Him. 
The rest of Nocturns, and the Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought 
might with His arm, * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born 
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world 
great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Both now ..., the 
Theotokion, in Tone III, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion): 
We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O Virgin 
Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross in the 
flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in that He 
is the Lover of mankind. 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone III: 
Christ hath arisen from the dead, * the first fruits of those that sleep. * The 
first-born of creation * and Creator of all that hath come to be, * hath renewed in 
Himself the corrupted nature of our race. * Death, no longer art thou lord, ** for 
the Master of all things hath destroyed thy dominion.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
Having tasted death in the flesh, O Lord, * Thou hast blotted out the 
bitterness of death by Thine arising * strengthening mankind against it, * and 
announcing the abolition of the ancient curse. ** Defender of our lives, O Lord, 
glory be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy purity, 
* Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of praise can I 
offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and stand in awe. 
* Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of grace. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone III: 
Awed by Thine immutable Godhead * and by Thy voluntary passion, O Lord, 
* Hades lamented, “I tremble at Thy body’s essence, which remaineth incorrupt. * 
I behold Thee, the One who is invisible, mystically making war against me; * 
wherefore those whom I hold cry out: ** Glory, O Christ, to Thy Resurrection!” 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
We the faithful contemplate an ineffable mystery: * Thine incomprehensible 
Crucifixion and Thine inexplicable arising. * For today death and Hades have 
been despoiled, * but mankind hath been clothed in incorruption. * Wherefore 
with thanksgiving we cry aloud unto Thee, * “Glory, O Christ, to Thy 
Resurrection!” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Mystically didst thou contain in thy womb * the incomprehensible and 
uncircumscribed One, * consubstantial with the Father and the Spirit; * and we 
acknowledge in thine Offspring one unconfused energy of the Trinity Who is 
glorified in the world. * And so with thanksgiving we cry unto thee, ** “Rejoice, 
thou Full of grace!” 
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses): 
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia, 
alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy 
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
 (On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays, 
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon ...,”) 
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the 
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the 
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a great 
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos. 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself 
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said 
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; * 
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, 
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, 
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, 
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living 
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy 
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O 
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from 
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God 
and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany and: 
The Sessional Hymn: 
A cause of amazement by his appearance, * and source of refreshment by his 
speech, * the radiant angel spake unto the myrrh-bearing women saying, * “Why 
do ye seek the living in a grave? * He hath arisen, emptying the graves. * Know 
that the unchangeable One hath changed corruption. * Wherefore cry unto God 
saying: * How fearful are Thy works! ** For Thou hast saved mankind.”  
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon: 
Thou, O Word, didst deliver the captivity of Zion from Babylon, * deliver me 
also ** from the passions unto life. 
Those who sow in the South * with tears inspired by God, ** shall in joy reap 
sheaves of everlasting life. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit, together with the Father and the Son * shineth forth the 
reflection of every good gift, ** In Him all things live and have their being.  
 
2nd Antiphon: 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Except the Lord build the house of the virtues, * in vain do we labor. ** While 
He doth protect our soul no one layeth waste our city. 
The saints, O Christ, fruits of the womb, * are by the Spirit, always sons to 
Thee, ** as Thou art to the Father. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
The Holy Spirit is the inspiration of all that is holy and wise; * for He doth 
quicken every creature. ** Let us worship Him together with the Father and the 
Son, for He is God. 
3rd Antiphon: 
Those who fear the Lord are blessed * as they walk along the paths of His 
commandments; * for they partake of the life-giving Fruit. 
Be glad, Chief Shepherd, * beholding Thine offspring around Thy table * 
bearing the branches of good works. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit is a superabundance of glory; * for from Him proceedeth 
forth grace and life into all creation; * wherefore He is praised together with the 
Father and the Word. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Say among the nations that the Lord is king; * 
for He hath established the universe which shall not be shaken 
The Verse: O Sing unto the Lord a new song. Sing unto the Lord all the 
earth. 
Let every breath ...,  
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath 
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * 
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, 
** and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” Then the Canons: 
Resurrection Canons Tone III. 
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
He who sentenced the earth to bring forth thorns as the fruit of the sweat of 
the transgressor, hath accepted in the body a crown of thorns from a lawless 
hand, abolishing the curse. He is our God, wherefore He is glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Our God hath been shown to be a triumphant victor and vanquisher of death, 
for death was smitten with fear when our God, having taken living flesh subject to 
suffering, wrestled with the tyrant and raised all with Himself, wherefore He hath 
been glorified.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: All the nations glorify thee as the true Theotokos, O thou who 
hast given birth without seed; for having come into thy hallowed womb, our God 
assumed that which was according to our nature, and as both God and man He 
was born from thee. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
By His divine blood, Christ hath redeemed the race of mankind, enslaved to 
the sin-loving tyrant, and making us divine He hath renewed us, wherefore He 
hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Christ, the Guardian of life, as a mortal willingly tasted death; while by nature 
being immortal He hath granted life to the dead, wherefore He hath been 
glorified. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Every order of heavenly beings fittingly bends the knee, O Virgin, to Him who 
was incarnate from thee, and together with them, those below the earth, and those 
upon the earth, for He hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O the mysteries which took place within thee! For God, who abundantly 
bestoweth all good things, hath given us the divine Spirit, and taken flesh from 
thee, O maiden, wherefore He hath been glorified. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Through Thy Cross the wicked one hath been shamed, for he hath fallen into 
the pit which he himself hath dug; while the horn of the humble, O Christ, hath 
been exalted in Thy Resurrection. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The preaching of true religion hath covered like flowing waters the seas of the 
nations, O Lover of mankind; for by arising from the tomb Thou hast revealed 
the light of the Trinity. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O living city of Him who is 
King forever; for through thee, O Sovereign Lady, God dwelt among those on 
earth. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O immaculate Cross, thou wast revealed to be a purification from the 
abominations of idols, for Jesus, supremely divine, stretched out His arms upon 
thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
May we the faithful worship thee, O Life-bearing tomb, for Christ, who is 
truly our God, hath been buried in thee and arose from thee. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
A rod from the root of Jesse hath budded forth, as the prophet said, for the 
Virgin blossomed forth with a flower for us - Thee O Christ; Holy art Thou, O 
Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
That Thou mightest make those born of earth partakers of the divine nature, 
Thou didst impoverish Thyself in assuming our flesh from the Virgin; Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast in love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest 
Thine only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
In Thy compassion, O Christ, Thou didst bear marks and wounds, bravely 
bearing the injurious blows and with long-suffering even endured being spat 
upon, wherewith Thou hast wrought salvation for me; Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
In a mortal body, O Life, Thou hast partaken of death, for the sake of the 
wretchedness of Thy needy and the sighing of Thy poor, and having despoiled the 
seducing destroyer, Thou hast raised all with Thee, O glorious One, gloriously 
hast Thou been glorified. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Remember, O Christ, the flock which Thou hast procured by 
Thy Passion. Accept the compassionate supplications of Thy most blessed Mother 
and watching over it in its affliction, deliver it by Thy power, O Lord. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O Lover of mankind, Who hath fashioned mankind according to Thine image, 
when it was slain by sin through transgression, Thou didst save it by Thy 
crucifixion on Calvary. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Death hath given up the dead whom it had swallowed, while the dominion of 
Hades, which brought forth corruption, was destroyed when Thou didst arise 
from the tomb, O Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Mary, thou art like a pure golden censor filling the world with 
the sweetest fragrance, for without commingling, one of the Holy Trinity, the 
Incarnate Word of God, hath made His abode in thee. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou, O Master, Who hath established the mountains in accordance with the 
ordinances of divine knowledge, art the stone which, without hands, hath been 
hewn from the Virgin. To Thy power be glory, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Word, Thou hast healed our diseased nature, by uniting with it in the Virgin, 
the most effectual medicine of Thine immaculate Godhead, O Master. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Lord, Thou art my portion and my most desired heritage; for, Thou O 
Word, hast from the Virgin united with me Thine own Hypostasis, having been 
manifest a person in the flesh. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE V 
Irmos: I rise at dawn unto Thee, * the Creator of all, * surpassing all 
worldly understanding; * for Thy commandments are light, * wherein do 
Thou guide me. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Handed over to an unjust judge by the envy of the Jews, Thou the all-seeing 
One who justly judgest all the earth, didst deliver Adam from the ancient 
condemnation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Christ, who arose from the dead, grant peace to Thy Churches, and by the 
invincible power of Thy Cross, save our souls. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou alone hast appeared, O Ever-virgin, as a Holy Tabernacle 
wider than the heavens, for thou hast received the Word of God, whom all of 
creation cannot contain. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O Christ, when Thy side was pierced by the lance, Thou didst deliver from the 
curse her who was formed from man’s side and who had become the agent of 
ruin for all mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Christ, our Savior, equal in being with the Father, hath raised from the dead 
the sacred temple of His most pure and all-honored body.  
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Word of God, O Virgin, thy Son, and the Creator of Adam the first-
formed, is not a creature, though He hath fashioned for Himself living flesh from 
thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Equal to the Father, is thy Son O Virgin, the Word of God, a perfect person in 
two natures, Jesus the Lord, perfect God and perfect man. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my 
spirit perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * 
and like Peter save me, * O my Helmsman. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
By Thy gracious descent, an abyss of mercy and compassion hath surrounded 
me; for becoming incarnate and taking the form of a servant, O Master, Thou hast 
made me divine and glorified me together with Thyself. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The man-slayer became as one dead when he saw the One who had been put 
to death restored to life. These are the tokens of Thy Resurrection, O Christ, and 
the rewards of Thine immaculate Passion. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Theotokion: O most pure one, who beyond understanding art alone the 
mediatress between the Creator and mankind, beseech thy Son to be merciful to 
thy sinful servants and make thyself their protectress. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Tried by stripes, and by the Passion of Thy Cross, Thou hast raised with Thee, 
those who lay slain in Hades; therefore I cry unto Thee, “Raise up my life up from 
corruption, O Lover of mankind.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The gates of Hades now open to Thee in fear, O Christ, and the enemy’s 
possessions are ravished, wherefore the women met Thee receiving gladness 
instead of sorrow. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
He who by nature hath no part in any created form, hath taken our form from 
the undefiled maiden, becoming a man in form and substance, yet unchanged in 
His divinity. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
From an abyss of sins and from the tempest of the passions do thou deliver 
me, O pure one, for thou art a safe haven and an abyss of wonders for those who 
in faith have recourse to thee. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today the Virgin ...”:  
Thou didst arise today, O merciful One, * and hast led us out from the gates 
of death. * Adam danceth today, and Eve rejoiceth. * The prophets also, along 
with patriarchs, ** ceaselessly praise the divine might of Thine authority. 
Ikos: Let heaven and earth dance today, and with one accord sing the praises 
of Christ our God, for He hath raised the prisoners from the tombs. All creation 
rejoiceth together as it offers fitting songs to the Creator of all things and our 
Redeemer. For today, as Giver of life, He draweth mortals out of Hades raising 
them to heaven. He layeth low the uprisings of the enemy and hath destroyed the 
gates of Hades by the divine might of His authority.  

--- PAGE 26 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the 
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us 
who cry to Thee, * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The shining veil of the temple was rent in twain by the crucifixion of the 
Creator, revealing the truth hidden in the scriptures to the faithful who cry, “O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thy side was pierced, O Christ, drops of Thy life-bearing blood, flowed 
by the divine dispensation of God, and fell upon the earth refashioning those who 
cry, “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 
Trinitarian: Let us believers glorify the good Spirit, along with the Father and 
the only-begotten Son, as we honor one Principle and one Godhead in three 
Hypostases and cry, “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The sun is not darkened for a mere man hanging upon a cross, but rather, 
upon beholding God incarnate, to whom we also sing, “O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Cowardly Hades, trembling before Him who is strong in His Godhead and 
who granteth incorruption, spewed forth the souls of the just, who cried out, “O 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Theotokion: O most pure one, thou art a precious treasury of blessings for 
those who, with a pure heart, confess thee to be the Mother of God; for from 
thee the God of our fathers became incarnate. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Lord of glory and ruler of the powers on high, Thou who art seated with 
the Father and wast carried in the arms of the Virgin; “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, 
the God of our fathers.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Death is bold, but when it battled with Thee, O God, made flesh from the 
Virgin as a man, Thou didst destroy it; “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our 
fathers.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
We all acknowledge thee to be the Theotokos who didst bear God in thy 
womb; for thou hast given birth to one of the Trinity, incarnate from thee. 
Blessed, O most pure one, is the Fruit of thy womb. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The radiance of the temple was shattered when Thy Cross was set upon 
Calvary, and all creation was shaken as it sang in fear, “All ye works of the Lord, 
bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou didst rise from the tomb, O Christ, and by Thy divine power, the Tree 
hath restored him who had fallen through temptation as he cried aloud, “All ye 
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou hast been declared a living temple of God, and a spiritual 
ark; for thou, O most pure Birthgiver of God, didst reconcile the Creator to 
mortal mankind, wherefore we, all His works, fittingly praise thee and supremely 
exalt thee throughout all ages. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The Word was not subject to suffering, for in His Godhead He cannot suffer; 
but it was in the flesh that God suffered, to Whom we also sing, “All ye works of 
the Lord, bless ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Having fallen asleep as a mortal, Thou wast raised up as immortal, O Savior, 
delivering from death those who sing, “All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 
Trinitarian: Devoutly do we worship the Godhead, united in three Hypostases, 
and we sing without ceasing, “All ye works of the Lord bless ye the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Blessed Virgin Mother, who hath been raised above the spiritual powers and 
set next to God, we bless thine Offspring, and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou hast revealed thy natural comeliness to be most fair when Thou hast 
given birth to the Godhead in the flesh, O Blessed Virgin, wherefore we bless 
thine Offspring, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant: 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
And then the appointed Katavasia: 
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat: 
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable … 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * 
as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
ODE IX 
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God: * for the Lord clearly 
passes through the closed gate of the Virgin: * naked at His going in and 
God bearing flesh at His coming out, * while the gate remaineth closed. * 
As ineffably the Theotokos and Mother of our God we magnify her. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Fearful it is, O Word of God, to behold Thee the Creator elevated upon the 
Tree, suffering in the flesh on behalf of Thy servants, and lying lifeless in a grave, 
and yet releasing the dead from Hades. Wherefore, O Christ, as All-powerful we 
magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
By being placed as one dead in a tomb, O Christ, Thou hast saved the 
forefathers from the corruption of death, and Thou didst make life blossom forth 
by Thine arising from the dead, leading mortal nature to the light and clothing it 
with divine incorruption. Wherefore as the source of the ever-living Light we 
magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed, O all-pure one, as the temple and throne of 
God, in which He who liveth in the highest made His abode, born without a man, 
and in no way opening the gates of thy flesh. Therefore by thine unceasing 
prayers, O holy one, finally defeat the tribes of the barbarians and subject them to 
our King. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O Christ our Savior, Thou hast become a source of glory for mortals by a 
dishonorable death, which Thou didst taste through crucifixion in Thy mortal 
nature, and by which Thou hast granted unto me incorruption, for Thou lovest 
mankind. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
By rising from the tomb, O Christ, Thou hast saved me, and for the sake of 
Thy compassionate mercy, Thou hast exalted me and brought me to the Father, 
Thy Begetter, at Whose right hand Thou hast taken Thy seat, O Lord. 
Another, of the Theotokos. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
For the devout faithful, who experience the ever-increasing spiritual and divine 
desire that cometh from singing praises in honor of thee, O Virgin, there can 
never be enough; wherefore we ever magnify thee as the Mother of God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou hast enthroned her who bare Thee, O Christ as an unfailing intercessor 
for us. By her supplications, O merciful One, grant unto us the Spirit who giveth 
freely of His goodness, and who proceedeth through Thee from the Father. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...,”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion (Svetilen). 
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to 
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the 
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion. 
On the Praises: “Let every breath ...,” 8 Stichera of the Resurrection, however, 
if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from the 
Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses. 
Resurrection Stichera, in Tone III: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
Come all ye nations, * acknowledge the power of the dread mystery; * for 
Christ our Savior, the beginningless Word, * was crucified for us and was willingly 
buried * and arose from the dead * to save the whole universe. ** Him let us 
worship. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Thy guards recounted all the marvels, O Lord, * but, by filling their right 
hands with money, * the Sanhedrin of folly thought to conceal Thy Resurrection, 
* which the world doth glorify; ** have mercy upon us. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
All things have been filled with joy on receiving proof of the Resurrection. * 
For Mary Magdalene having come to the tomb, * found an angel seated upon the 
stone, * radiant in shining raiment, saying, * “Why dost Thou seek the living 
among the dead? * He is not here, but He hath arisen, as He foretold, ** and 
goeth before thee into Galilee.” 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
In Thy light, O Master and Lover of mankind, * shall we see light. * For Thou 
didst rise from the dead, * granting salvation unto the race of mankind, * 
wherefore all creation doth glorify Thee, the only sinless One; ** have mercy 
upon us. 
Other Stichera by Anatolius: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
As a morning hymn, O Lord, * the myrrh-bearing women offered Thee their 
tears. * For bringing perfumes of sweet fragrances, they came to Thy grave, eager 
to anoint Thy most pure body. * An angel seated upon the stone declared unto 
them the good tidings, * “Why seek ye the living among the dead? * For He hath 
trampled down death, He hath arisen as God, ** granting unto all His great 
mercy.” 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
A radiant angel seated by Thy life-giving tomb * spake to the myrrh-bearing 
women saying, * “The Redeemer hath emptied the tombs, * He hath despoiled 
Hades ** and hath arisen on the third day as alone God and All-powerful.” 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
On the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the tomb seeking Thee. 
* When she did not find Thee, she lamented and cried out with grief, * “Alas, my 
Savior, how hast Thou, the King of all, been stolen?” * But a pair of radiant angels 
from within the sepulcher cried out, * “Why dost thou weep, woman?” * “I 
weep,” she said, “because they have taken my Lord from the tomb * and I know 
not where they have laid Him.” * Whereupon, turning back and seeing Thee, she 
at once cried out, ** “My Lord and my God, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 

--- PAGE 32 ---
The Hebrews shut Life within the tomb; * but the thief opened the paradise of 
pure delight with his voice when he cried aloud saying, * “The One who wast 
crucified with me and who wast hung with me upon the Tree * also appeareth to 
me seated upon a throne together with the Father. ** For He is Christ our God, 
Who hath great mercy.” 
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel  
Note: If the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ the Eothinon is taken from 
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve 
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise 
we cry: ** Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, 
glory be to Thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion. 
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose 
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by 
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
AT THE LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
At The Liturgy Beatitudes, in Tone III  
From paradise didst Thou drive our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy 
commandment, O Christ; but, O compassionate One, Thou didst cause to dwell 
therein the thief who confessed Thee on the Cross, crying out: “Remember me, O 
Savior, in Thy kingdom!” 
With the curse of death didst Thou condemn us who had sinned, O Lord, 
Bestower of life; yet having suffered in Thy flesh, O sinless Master, Thou hast 
granted life unto mortals who cry out: “Remember us also in Thy kingdom!” 
In rising from the dead, Thou hast raised us up from the passions with Thyself 
through Thy Resurrection, O Lord; and all the power of death hast Thou 
destroyed, O Savior. Wherefore, with faith we cry out to Thee: “Remember us 
also in Thy kingdom!” 
O Thou who as God grantest life, by Thy three days in the tomb Thou didst 
raise up with Thyself the dead in Hades, and as One Who is good Thou hast 
poured forth incorruption upon all of us who with faith ever cry out: “Remember 
us also in Thy kingdom!” 
Risen from the dead, O Savior, Thou didst first appear to the myrrh-bearing 
women, crying out: “Rejoice!” and through them Thou didst announce Thy 
Resurrection to Thy friends, O Christ. Wherefore, with faith we cry out to Thee, 
“Remember us also in Thy kingdom!” 
Moses, stretching out his arms on the mountain, prefigured the Cross and thus 
conquered Amalek. And, receiving it with faith as a mighty weapon against the 
demons, we all cry out: “Remember us also in Thy kingdom!”  
O ye faithful, let us hymn the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the one God, the 
one Lord, as from a single Sun; for the Trinity is thrice-luminous and enlightening 
all who cry out: “Remember us also in Thy kingdom!” 
Theotokion: Rejoice, O portal of God, through which the incarnate Creator 
passed without breaking thy seal! Rejoice, thou illumined cloud which bore Christ, 
the divine Rain! Rejoice, ladder and throne of heaven! Rejoice, honored mountain 
of God, fruitful and unquarried! 
 Resurrection Troparion, in Tone III: 
Let the heavens be glad; let earthly things rejoice; * for the Lord hath wrought 
might with His arm, * trampling down death by death; * becoming the first-born 
of the dead, * delivering us from the belly of Hades, ** and granting the world 
great mercy. 
 

--- PAGE 34 ---
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone III:  
Thou didst arise today, O merciful One, * and hast led us out from the gates 
of death. * Adam danceth today, and Eve rejoiceth. * The prophets also, along 
with patriarchs, ** ceaselessly praise the divine might of Thine authority. 
 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone III: Chant unto our God, chant ye; * chant 
unto our King, chant ye.  
The Verse: Clap your hands all ye nations; shout unto God with a voice of 
rejoicing.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone III: In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped; let me never be put 
to shame.  
The Verse: Be Thou unto me a God to defend me, and a house of refuge 
to save me. 
  
