--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE III 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of compunction, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy martyrs ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
O heavenly father, accept me as Thou didst the repentant prodigal son, though 
I sin exceedingly and embitter Thee, the good Master Who art merciful by nature; 
and make me one of Thy hirelings. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
I have passed the time of my life in slothfulness and have drawn nigh to the 
end, wretch that I am. I give no thought to the judgment which awaiteth me, nor 
to my falling away from God. But, having turned me back to Thee, О Savior, 
rescue me from them. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
From Gehenna, from the gnashing of teeth, and every other eternal retribution 
do Thou deliver my lowly soul, О supremely good Lord; that with faith I may 
hymn the merciful God, Who art by nature the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy incorporeal angels, in the same tone: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Thou didst create the choirs of incorporeal beings, О Lord, unto all showing 
forth the richness of Thy goodness; and out of non-existence Thou didst bring 
into being those who now glorify Thy glory with never silent voices. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Great is the power of Thine angels, О Christ; for, though bodiless, they 
protect the world, preserving the Churches by Thy power, О Master; and they 
entreat Thee on behalf of the whole world. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Beholding Thy single and three-Sunned beauty, the hosts who minister to 
Thee reveal derivative splendors to those in the world; and shining forth as one, 
they impart divine glory unto us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О most pure one, who hast dominion over all creation, by thy fervent 
intercession and maternal prayer free my mind, which is grievously beset by the 
passions, and enslave me to thy Son and God. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 
our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone III: 
Our evening hymnody do we bring to Thee, O Christ, with incense and 
spiritual odes, Have mercy and save our souls.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Save me, O Lord my God, in so far as Thou art the salvation of all. For the 
storm of the passions disquieteneth me, and the yoke of my transgressions 
weigheth heavily upon me. Stretch out Thy helping hand and lead me up to the 
light of compunction, for Thou alone art compassionate and the Lover of 
mankind. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Great is the power of Thy Cross, О Lord! For though it was 
planted in one place, it worketh throughout the whole world, making apostles of 
fishermen and martyrs of the heathen, that they might pray for our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Lady, intercessor for all who pray to thee: In thee we find boldness, of thee 
do we boast, and in thee have we placed all our hope. Entreat Him Who was born 
of thee on behalf of thine unprofitable servants. 
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
SUNDAY NIGHT: TONE III  
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos  
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
О most holy Virgin Mary who alone art of great renown, more glorious than, 
the cherubim, О daughter of David and beauty of Jacob, the Mother of our God: 
thy glory hath been magnified exceedingly, and we all glorify thee with faith. 
Thou didst bear in thine arms as a man Him Who stretched out the sky like a 
skin by His word. Wherefore, do thou constantly beseech Him, О pure one, that 
He deliver my soul from the irrationality of the passions and from all sorrow. 
Glory ..., О Virgin who wast foretold before all ages, thou art the most pure 
purple robe of the King of glory, wherein He Who had clothed our forefather 
Adam in garments of skin clad Himself in the latter days: cover me also with thy 
protection. 
Theotokion: О Virgin who hast given birth to Christ, thou hast extinguished 
the unbearable fire of sin, which of old wrought corruption for the race of 
mankind. Wherefore, dry up the torrents of the passions of my soul by thy 
prayers. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
The Master and Lord Who hath dominion over fire hath been called thy Son, 
О pure one; wherefore, deliver me from the works of the passions by thine 
intercessions, О Lady. 
From the tempest of carnal passions do thou quickly deliver me, thy servant, 
О most pure one who hast given birth to the Calm of salvation and the 
Wellspring of dispassion. 
Glory ..., As the luminous lampstand of the never-waning Light, О most pure 
one, thou hast enlightened the world. Wherefore, with thy beams dispel the clouds 
from my soul. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., О Lady who hast given birth ineffably to Christ, the Bestower of 
life, enliven me who am dead of soul because of the multitude of mine evil 
passions. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
The siege of carnal understanding hath beset me and made my soul captive; 
yet do thou, О Lady who hast given birth to the Mind which transcendeth all the 
understanding of the world, grant me thy peace. 
From thy womb thou didst pour forth the noetic Myrrh upon the world; 
wherefore, free my soul from the defilements of the passions, О most pure one, 
and grant me the myrrh of dispassion by thy supplications. 
Glory ..., Knowing thee to be the golden jar manifestly holding Christ, the 
God-man, the Manna of life, I pray: feed thou my soul which is famished with 
hunger, and give it the torrent of the Spirit to drink. 
Both now ..., Of old, unrestrained, Eve brought about death; but thou hast 
brought about true life by thy pure virginity. Wherefore, deliver me from a sinful 
death by thy supplications. 
ODE V 
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
As our deliverance, thy Son hath delivered all from corruption, О Virgin; 
wherefore, deliver me from a carnal understanding and from the presence of the 
passions. 
By the fire of thy prayers burn up all the thorns of my passion-filled thoughts, 
О Theotokos who hast purified the nature of man as with tongs and ember. 
Glory ..., Thou art the divine heifer of the divine Bullock Who in His love for 
mankind was slaughtered for our sake. With His divine blood do thou purify my 
heart. 
Both now ..., Of old I acquired the beautiful robe of the virtues, yet I have cast 
it off in my slothfulness; but do thou, О Virgin, now clothe me in one that is yet 
more splendid by thy supplications. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The cruel wiles of evil have shaken the temple of my soul, yet do thou who 
hast given birth to Christ, Who established the earth upon the waters, make me 
steadfast by thy prayers. 
In giving birth to the Pearl of great price, thou hast released mortals from their 
debt; wherefore, О most pure one, quickly loose the bonds of my transgressions, 
passions and sorrows. 
Glory ..., The supremely good God Who was born from thy womb hath given 
thee to the faithful as a refuge and divine protection; wherefore, О most pure one, 
cover me with thy hands, and preserve me. 
Both now ..., Often engulfed in frenzy by the billows of life, and ever tempest-
tossed by the works of the enemy, I now cry out to thee: О Theotokos, help me! 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Of the divine Faith ...”: 
Thou wast the divine tabernacle of the Word, * O only all-pure Virgin Mother 
* who surpassed the angels in purity. * By the divine waters of thy supplications * 
cleanse me who, more than all others, * have become dust, defiled by carnal 
transgressions; ** and grant me great mercy, O pure one.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the 
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us 
who cry to Thee, * ‘Blessed art Thou, the God of our fathers!’ 
Crowds of wicked demons and hordes of carnal passions have surrounded me; 
yet as thou hast given birth to Christ, Who is mighty in battles, deliver me from 
frequent griefs and cruel falls. 
He Who alone cannot be approached by the cherubic beings and is held in 
awe by the ranks of the angels made His abode within thee, О pure one, and hath 
renewed us. О Lady, through Him render me terrible to invisible foes. 
Glory ..., О Virgin, thou wast a noetic garden of paradise which put forth the 
Tree of life; and Adam, partaking thereof, hath been delivered from, the fruit of 
death. Wherefore, bring sweetness to me now, and deliver me from the taste of 
the passions. 
Both now ..., Deliver me from the mire of the passions of my body, and from 
the temptations of the demons, О thou who hast given birth to the Redeemer for 
our sake, as the habitation of the Most High and hallowed temple of the God of 
our fathers. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
О cloud of the Light Who fashioned the great luminaries in the universe: with 
thy rays dispel all the darkness, day and night, of all my passions and 
transgressions, and show me to be a child of the light, О Birthgiver of God. 
By the Rain which descended from heaven into thy womb, О Theotokos, 
enlighten and bedew my soul and heart, and extinguish the flame of passions and 
sorrows, that I may glorify thee fervently throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., О pure one, thou didst give birth ineffably to the Wisdom of God 
which united the earthly and the heavenly, bringing all things forth from 
nonexistence; by His word grant me wisdom and understanding, that I may hymn 
clearly thy divine birthgiving. 
Both now ..., О Sovereign Lady of the world, I cry aloud and pray that my soul 
and body may be bedewed through thy supplications, and that I may be quickly 
delivered from the pangs of sin and the evil of the passions; for thou art the 
healing of all mankind. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who didst 
conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet remained 
unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the hand of man, 
* and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed forth * from the 
root of David. 
Thou wast shown to be cloth divinely woven for Christ, from whence the 
Spirit prepared the divine raiment of the flesh. Wherefore, by thy supplications, О 
pure one, clothe me also in the vesture of chastity. 
О noetic vine who hast put forth for us the divine Grapes, by Whom we have 
been given the water of incorruption to drink: by thy prayers pour forth upon my 
soul compunction and the wine of purification. 
Glory ..., О pure and holy bridal chamber, by whose nature God wedded His 
nature to that of mortals, I beseech thee: unite me to thy Son, and impart unto me 
divine life by thy prayers. 
Both now ..., О Virgin who hast given birth to Christ, the Wellspring of 
incorruption, thou hast transformed the pasture of corrupt human nature. 
Wherefore, by thy supplications deaden the stormy assaults of the passions which 
consume me. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparion. The rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE III  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of compunction, in Tone III:  
Dwelling on earth, О my soul, repent, for dust doth not chant in the grave, 
nor is it delivered from transgressions. But cry out to Christ God: О Thou Who 
knowest the hearts of men, I have sinned against Thee! Before Thou judgest me, 
have pity and mercy on me, О God. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Wherefore, О my soul, dost thou continue in offenses? Wherefore dost thou 
abide the setting aside of repentance? Call to mind the coming judgment, and cry 
out to Christ God: О sinless Lord Who knowest the hearts of men: I have sinned; 
have mercy on me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy purity, 
* Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of praise can I 
offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and stand in awe. 
* Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of grace. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
At the dread judgment I shall denounce myself, there being no need for 
accusers, and shall condemn myself, there being no need for witnesses; for the 
books of my conscience will be opened, and the things I have done in secret will 
be exposed. Wherefore, О God Who wilt examine my deeds at that universal trial, 
cleanse me and save me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Thou knowest the depth of mine offenses, О Lord. Give me a helping hand, 
as Thou didst to Peter, and save me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: The goodly courage of your endurance vanquished the wiles 
of the enemy, the author of evil, О all-famed passion-bearers; wherefore, ye have 
been deemed worthy of eternal blessedness. But pray ye to the Lord, that He save 
the flock of Christ-loving people, in that ye are witnesses to the Truth. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, О Mary, Virgin Mother, holy mountain, garden of Eden, from whom 
Christ God, the seedless Word was born, and through Whom life hath budded 
forth upon the world. 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
When we shall stand before Thine inexorable tribunal and divine judgment, 
before which the hosts of heaven stand with trembling, how then shall I appear 
before Thee, О most righteous Judge? I have done deeds worthy of 
condemnation and fire. Yet at the supplications of Thine angels have pity on me 
then, and save me! 
By Thy word Thou didst bring into being those in heaven and those on earth, 
in that Thou art almighty; and the angelic choirs, standing before Thee with fear, 
offer Thee unceasing hymnody, О Master, illumining all the ends of the earth with 
Thy light. And with them we also cry out to Thee: In Thy tender compassion save 
us! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
As an uncultivated vine, O Virgin, * thou didst sprout forth the most comely 
Cluster of grapes * Which poureth forth upon us the wine of salvation * making 
glad the souls and bodies of all. * Wherefore, ever blessing thee as the cause of 
good things, * with the angel we cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou who art full of 
grace!  
ODE I 
Canon of compunction, to our Lord, Jesus Christ and His holy martyrs, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone III: 
Irmos: Having engulfed the chariots of Pharaoh in the deep, * Thou didst 
part the sea, О Lord, * and save the people of Israel, * who praised Thee 
with hymns. 
О Sinless One, deliver me from the myriads of transgressions I have 
mindlessly committed, granting me tears of compunction, as once Thou didst to 
the harlot. 
Through the virtues show me to be Thy temple, though I am become a den of 
thieves through mine unseemly deeds, О Thou Who, as the Lover of mankind, 
wast willingly born in a cave. 
To the martyrs: Piloted by the divine Spirit, ye navigated the tempest of 
torments, О divinely inspired martyrs, and have put in at the harbor of God. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
To the martyrs: Enlightened by the grace of the Spirit, О all-famed martyrs, 
rejoicing, ye escaped the most profound darkness of the madness of idolatry . 
Theotokion: О all-holy and most pure one, helper of sinners, restoration of 
the fallen: Grant the repentance of compunction unto me who have sinned 
greatly. 
Another canon, of the holy incorporeal angels, the acrostic whereof is “I 
compose a third hymn for the incorporeal ones,” the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone III: 
Irmos: Let us chant a new song О ye people, * unto Him Who was born 
from the Virgin for our salvation * and hath made those on earth one with 
those in heaven * for He hath been glorified. 
As the Light without beginning, imparting all radiance, О Christ God, 
enlighten my thoughts through the intercessions of Thy hosts. 
Rejoicing angelically, the choirs of the angels are mystically illumined by a 
most rich communion of Thy beauteous splendors, О Savior. 
As the good Creator of life, the Spirit, Who doeth good and Who proceedeth 
from the Father, hath made steadfast the heavenly hosts by His intangible divine 
grace. 
Theotokion: О most noetically rich Gabriel, divine chief captain of the 
incorporeal choirs: Unto her who is joyous utter the cry of joy: Rejoice, О all-
immaculate one! 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Do Thou firmly establish me О Lord * Who alone art abundantly 
merciful; * and extend Thy hand unto me, * as Thou didst to Peter, * and 
save me. 
As Thou didst save drowning Peter, О Lover of mankind, so also lead me up 
from the depths of my transgressions. 
The deceiver hath brought death upon me, slaying me with the passions; but 
do Thou, О Bestower of life, revive me by examples of repentance. 
To the martyrs: Unjustly consumed by material fire, О martyrs, ye were 
immaterially consumed by the desire for the Immaterial One. 
To the martyrs: Torn asunder, the martyrs set at naught the maiming and 
pursuits of the deceiver; and they were deemed worthy of crowns. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: О Mary of regal calling, by thy supplications free me who am 
beset by many soul-destroying passions. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Thou hast broken the bow of the enemy * and crushed their shields 
by Thy might, * О Master Christ, our confirmation, * holy art Thou О 
Lord! 
О good One, Thou hast shown the angelic choirs to be rivers and streams 
flowing with goodness, shining with the radiance of Thy hidden mystery. 
That Thou mightest manifestly show forth the treasures of Thy riches and Thy 
might, О Master Christ, Thou didst fashion the noetic hosts to share in Thy glory. 
Standing with trembling before Thee and ministering to Thee, the angelic 
luminaries ever hymn Thine infinite power, О Christ. 
Theotokion: The Master of all that is, immutably taking on all of humanity 
from thee, О Mother of God, showed thee to be a source of grace. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Wast Thou angered by the rivers?, * wast Thy wrath upon the rivers, 
* or Thy strivings upon the seas? 
Loose the bonds of my passions, О Lord, and, binding me with repentance, 
show me to be a sharer in Thy good things. 
Illumine me with radiant examples of repentance, О Christ my Sun, dispelling 
the deep nighttime of mine evils. 
To the martyrs: О wise spiritual athletes, ye were shown to be burning coals 
consuming the tinder of ungodliness, and enlightening those in darkness. 
To the martyrs: Ye emulated the death of Christ, О martyrs, having been 
subjected to divers pangs; wherefore, ye have inherited divine life. 
Theotokion: Grant me true repentance, and still the tumult of my passions, О 
pure intercessor for the sinful. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Strange and ineffable was the mystery of Thy nativity. * I heard 
report of Thee, and was afraid; * and, rejoicing, I cry unto Thee: * Glory to 
Thy power, О Lover of mankind! 
О clouds who received the effulgence of the threefold Sun, ornaments of the 
Trinity: Impelled by the power of the Spirit ye were borne aloft by the divine will. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The angels were sent into the world as guardians of the salvation of the pious 
who would believe on Thee, О Savior; and they preserve Thy servants. 
The angels are mystically illumined by their pure proximity to Thee and Thy 
divine effulgence; and they cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, О Lover of mankind! 
Theotokion: Like a servant, I come as a supplicant before Thy protection, О 
most immaculate one. Deliver me from the turmoil of the passions, О Birthgiver 
of God, who without suffering hast given birth to our Cause. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: By Thine unwaning light, O Christ, * do Thou illumine my humble 
soul * and guide it in Thy fear * for Thy commandments are light. 
Leave me not stripped naked of good deeds at Thy tribunal, О Lover of 
mankind; but through repentance clothe me in the raiment of godly deeds. 
I have been wounded by the sword of the passions and cast into the pit of 
despair. Disdain me not, О Master, but cure me with the medicine of conversion. 
To the martyrs: Though your nails were cruelly torn out, and ye were lacerated 
with wounds and slain with the sword, ye did not bend your knees before the 
graven images. 
To the martyrs: The world is ever adorned by your sufferings, О martyrs; 
wherefore, ye have received a dwelling-place with the angels. 
Theotokion: О thou who, at the word of the archangel, didst alone give birth 
to the Word in the flesh, yet remained a virgin, deliver me from irrational acts, 
that I may hymn thee with honorable words. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
Illumined with thrice-radiant light, О ye faithful, with the angelic armies let us 
hymn the one Godhead: the Father, the Son and the Spirit. 
Luminaries moving within the never-waning radiance of the supremely divine 
Godhead, the angelic ranks, manifestly enriched, give utterance. 
The seraphim, angels illumined by the Spirit of the Godhead, teach us to 
worship the one divine Principle which is wholly without beginning, manifestly 
giving utterance to the thrice-holy cry. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Descending from heaven, the Archangel Gabriel announced to 
thee, О all-pure maiden Theotokos, that thou wouldst give birth seedlessly to the 
Bestower of life. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: О Lover of mankind, disdain not those * who have reached the end 
of the ages * and are assailed with destruction by the threefold billows of 
perils, * yet cry aloud: О Savior, save us, * as Thou didst save the prophet 
from the sea monster! 
Puffed up in mind, like the Pharisee of old I have grievously fallen through 
transgressions O Christ, and seeing me, the deceiver is gladdened. О Thou Who 
didst humble him by the Cross, have pity on me who am now brought low. 
Sin-loving in this life like no other, О Master, I have wasted Thy long-
suffering, wretch that I am, and am still senseless. But by Thy tender compassion 
convert me. 
To the martyrs: With wrathful eagerness condemning the divinely wise to be 
run through and to be consumed by fire, the violators of the law showed them to 
be truly more lustrous than gold, and heirs to Christ. 
To the martyrs: Passing through trials full of battles and tremendous struggles, 
and wounds beyond the endurance of human nature, ye defeated the prince of 
darkness and received crowns from God, О spiritual athletes. 
Theotokion: We hymn thee, the true Mother of the Creator, as the ark of the 
law, the truly holy table, our mercy-seat, the animate temple of God, and the all-
golden lampstand. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: As an image of habitation in the uttermost depths of Hades, * Jonah 
cried aloud: * Lead up my life from corruption, * О Lover of mankind! 
Their voices never stilled, the archangels and angels, the principalities, 
authorities and powers mightily hymn the primal and all-accomplishing effulgence 
of the Godhead. (Twice) 
О Thou Who didst invisibly adorn the noetic world with an all-harmonious 
arrangement of the ranks of angels, Thou wast well-pleased to have the honored 
Church emulate that goodly order. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: The Word Who dwelt within thee hath shown thee to be an ever-
flowing wellspring of healings; wherefore, О Virgin Theotokos, heal thou the 
wounds of my soul 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: * 
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: * 
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
My time draweth to a close, О my soul. My departure is at hand. Wherefore, 
show forth the fruits of repentance before the doors are closed to thee, and cry 
out unto Christ: Save me, О Lord! 
Let us till our hearts with the plough of a proper understanding, sowing the 
wheat of repentance, that we may reap the grain of righteousness for Christ, the 
Husbandman of our souls. 
To the martyrs: О martyrs of the Lord, ye beacons of piety who fought against 
ungodliness and became the enrichment of the poor: Enrich with the virtues my 
most accursed, impoverished soul. 
To the martyrs: О Christ, Who didst save the publican who sighed from the 
depths of his heart, accept my feeble sighing and save me, for the sake of the 
passion-bearers who glorified Thee by their own members. 
Theotokion: О wellspring who pourest forth the water of remission, dry up 
the stench of my transgressions, granting me a shower of tears, that I may ever 
hymn thee as the Theotokos. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Proud was the tyrant; * yet he was as a plaything for the children; * 
for, trampling underfoot the flame heated sevenfold, * they chanted: 
Blessed art Thou, * O Lord God of our fathers!  
Gazing upon the primal effulgence with steadfast mind and undaunted gaze, О 
ye angelic choirs, ye became secondary luminaries through partaking thereof, 
crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! (Twice) 
Led on by unwavering desire and steadfast love, by proximity ye became 
secondary luminaries through the beauties of the Creator, О ye angelic choirs, 
crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: In thy divine birthgiving, О Theotokos, thou hast given birth in 
the flesh to the pre-eternal Word, Who is wholly without beginning and was 
begotten of the Father without mother. Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О Lady! 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: In His divine power the Lord descended into the flames * and was 
seen walking with the Children of the Hebrews: * O ye priests, bless and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
For his mockery Ham was declared a slave by his father’s sentence. And what 
dost thou do, О my soul, enslaving thyself to the passions and riotously giving 
thyself over to mockery, lacking all sense of shame before the heavenly father? 
Mindlessly surrendering to enmity, Cain became the slayer of his brother. And 
thou hast shown thyself to be like unto him, for though thou hast not slain 
anyone, yet thou hast brought death upon thyself through the love of pleasures 
and the deceptions of life, О my soul. 
To the martyrs: Assembling in faith, let us hymn as is meet the choice pearls of 
the Lord, the precious vessels, the lamps shining with the radiance of divine grace, 
the passion-bearers of the Lord. 
To the martyrs: Accepting the blood of the wise passion-bearers like incense, 
О Word, by their prayers save those who fall down before Thee in repentance, for 
Thou alone art merciful. 
Theotokion: Because of the magnitude of my prodigal life I have now drawn 
nigh unto Hades. О most tenderly compassionate maiden, have pity and save me, 
in that thou didst ineffably give birth to the loving God. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The flame of material fire withered * through the immaterial flame 
brought about by the god-seeing children, * wherefore they chanted: * 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
As the Creator of all, by Thy thought Thou didst bring the angels into being; 
and they stand before Thee with fear, crying aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Becoming like flames by partaking of the divine fire, the celestial intelligences 
cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages! 
Before visible things Thou didst create the immaterial and noetic angels, who 
unceasingly cry out to Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: О Virgin Birthgiver of God, in a manner transcending description 
thou hast given birth to the Word of the Father, incarnate, Whom all the works of 
the Lord hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who didst 
conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet remained 
unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the hand of man, 
* and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed forth * from the 
root of David. 
Once, because of his temperance, Jacob received the birthright, and, unable to 
restrain his stomach, Esau fell from his position as the elder son. How evil is 
intemperance, and how great is abstinence! Cease committing evil deeds, О my 
soul, and love the increase of good things. 
Having endured many evils, the blameless Job was crowned; for the torrents 
of temptations, rushing at him, did not shake the tower of his heart. Him do thou 
ever emulate, remaining unaffected by the wiles of the evil one, О my soul. 
To the martyrs: Forged in the fire of the divine Spirit, ye were clearly shown to 
be swords which cut down the hordes of the adversary, О passion-bearers of 
Christ; and, glorified by great victories, ye have been crowned by the almighty 
right hand of the King of all. 
To the martyrs: О ye multitude of martyrs, entreat God the Master, Who hath 
accepted your ineffable toils and enrolled you in the armies of the incorporeal 
ones, that He wash away the multitude of my countless evils. 
Theotokion: О splendid palace of the Master, show me to be a dwelling-place 
of light; О impassable gate, open unto me the ways of repentance; О holy land, 
guide me to the land of the meek. О Lady, show me to be free of all the dominion 
of the passions. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Wounded with the sweet arrow of thy most pure birthgiving, * О 
pure one, * marveling at thy right desirable beauty, * with angelic hymnody 
we magnify thee as is meet * as the Mother of God. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Standing now before the great and primal Light, О most divine angels of God, 
ye have become most powerful advocates for all of us who magnify you as far as 
we are able. (Twice) 
Clearly deemed worthy to glorify the Trinity equal in power, and first illumined 
by the effulgence thereof, grant us who piously magnify you, that we may be 
illumined with reflected radiance. 
Theotokion: We all know thee to be the foundation of our salvation; for by thy 
deifying blood thy most pure birthgiving hath saved those who with faith hymn 
and glorify thee, О Theotokos. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone III: 
Gather the scattered thoughts of my mind, O Lord, and purify my barren and 
wasted heart, granting me repentance as didst Thou to Peter, that like the Publican 
I may sigh in sorrow, and like the Harlot shed tears, that I may cry with a loud 
voice unto Thee: Save me, O God, for Thou alone art compassionate and the 
Lover of mankind. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
While offering a multitude of hymns, I am found to be sinning; for chanting 
hymns with my tongue, my soul doth dwell on wicked thoughts. * But do Thou, 
O Christ God set both aright through repentance, and have mercy upon me.  
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Come, О ye people, and let us all honor the memory of the 
holy passion-bearers; for, having been a spectacle for angels and men, they 
received crowns of victory from Christ, and pray on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О pure Lady of the originate holiness, who art the boast of the heavenly ranks, 
the subject of the apostles’ hymnody and the fulfillment of the prophets, accept 
our supplications. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT THE LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III: 
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy 
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who 
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom! 
Overlooking the multitude of mine evils in the multitude of Thy mercy, О 
Christ, save me, and on the dread day of condemnation deliver me from 
everlasting torment, О Savior, that I may hymn Thy goodness. 
О ye cherubim and seraphim, ye thrones, archangels, powers, principalities, 
dominions, angels and all authorities, entreat the Creator, that, in that He is the 
Lover of mankind, He overlook mine offenses when He shall come to judge the 
earth. 
To the martyrs: Having dyed vesture for themselves in their sacred blood, in a 
godly manner the spiritual athletes of Christ were truly deemed worthy to reign 
with the King of the heavenly hosts; and they ask remission of transgressions for 
us who ever honor them as is meet. 
Glory ..., О ye faithful, piously hymning the one Godhead in three Hypostases: 
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the Comforter: with the angels let us cry 
out unceasingly with our voices: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, О God Who savest 
our souls! 
Both now ..., О pure one, thou radiant cloud, who hast given birth to the Light 
from Light: Guiding to the Light me who have been darkened by the passions and 
pleasures of life, set me aright, and pray that I may receive the glory which those 
who lived righteously have now received. 
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His minis-
ters a flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a 
flame of fire.  
