--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING: TONE III 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of compunction, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “In crosswise manner ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Perceiving in me a slothfulness toward profitable works, the multifarious 
formed serpent transforms itself, luring me towards ever more bitter evils. By 
displaying for me the sweetness of sin, through his own bitter activity which is 
opposed to the commandments of God, he taketh advantage of my wicked 
character, O Christ, and seduceth me to accept evils as good. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Having eagerly trodden the whole path of iniquity and sin, and utterly 
departed from that which is straight, I have now drawn nigh to the gates of death; 
and, thereby trapped, I cry aloud: О my supremely good Jesus, Thou Path of our 
life, turn me to the broad expanse of true repentance; save and grant me 
correction; and before my death, grant me divine forgiveness! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
I have been slain by divers sins, by multitudes of transgressions and great 
misdeeds; and I lie dead, truly helpless. Only my hope in Thy loving-kindness 
remaineth alive, О Christ, Who dost grant both breath and life unto the dead and 
ever slayeth the passions which kill us. Wherefore, going before me, rescue me 
from everlasting death. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy forerunner, in the same tone: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О Forerunner, who in thy birth loosed the barrenness of thy mother and the 
muteness of thy father: By thy right acceptable supplications to the loving Son of 
the Father, the Master and God of all, Whom the Mind dispassionately begot as 
the Word, do away with the sterility of my heart and the irrationality of my soul, 
and strengthen me to say and do works of love for Him. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Thou wast sent before the face of Christ to prepare His paths and make 
straight His ways. By thy supplications and manifest help, show my heart to be 
well trodden by Him. О thou who wast deemed worthy to appear at His precious 
feet, grant that I may walk the ground of heaven, which the feet of the meek 
tread, that with love I may honor thee as my mediator. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
On earth thou didst emulate the life of the angels, О culmination of the 
prophets, first martyr of the New Covenant, who wast the first preacher to 
announce to those beneath the earth that the divine Word would descend thither, 
and wast borne witness to by Christ. О John the Baptist, friend of the Lamb and 
Redeemer, by thy supplications deliver thy servant from all the temptations of the 
enemy and from his multifarious trials. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О blessed Mary, divinely joyous maiden, cloud of the never-waning Light: 
Shine the light of repentance upon me who am mindlessly stuck fast in the 
darkness of sin; and by thy supplications deliver me from the fire of Gehenna and 
the unremitting darkness, О most pure Virgin, and show me to share in the never-
setting day, for I flee beneath thy protection. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst 
hearken unto me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone III: 
Our evening hymn do we bring unto Thee, O Christ, * with incense and 
spiritual odes, ** Have mercy on us and save our souls.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Save me, O Lord my God, insofar as Thou art the salvation of all. For the 
storm of the passions disquieteneth me, and the yoke of my transgressions 
weigheth heavily upon me. Stretch out Thy helping hand and lead me up to the 
light of compunction, for Thou alone art compassionate and the Lover of 
mankind. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Great is the power of Thy martyrs, О Christ; for while lying in 
their graves they drive evil spirits away; and, having struggled for piety with their 
faith in the Trinity, they abolished the authority of the enemy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Theotokos - holy among women, thou Mother unwedded: entreat the King 
and God Whom thou didst bear, that He save us, insofar as He is the Lover of 
mankind.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE III 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Having lived out my life in slothfulness, I have drawn nigh unto the end of my 
life; yet do thou thyself, О most pure one, if but one last time, grant me 
compunction, I pray, that I may weep bitterly over my countless transgressions. 
With the passions of my flesh, О Virgin, I have mindlessly defiled the beauty 
of the divine image, and am afraid of God’s displeasure and the terrible threat of 
fire; yet do thou thyself have mercy upon me who flee to thee. 
Glory ..., Falling to my knees, wretch that I am, I beg thy help, О most holy 
Virgin: hearken thou to my pain-wracked soul, and by the radiance of thy prayers 
dispel the cloud of grief which weighs heavily upon me. 
Both now ..., Grant that the furrows of my passion-plagued soul may be 
watered abundantly with tears, and grant that I may produce fruit an hundredfold, 
О Lady; and fill my heart with all manner of gladness, that I may glorify thee. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
О good Theotokos, grant me a torrent of tears, and thereby quench the 
furnace of my passions, and wash away all defilement from my soul. 
In iniquities have I defiled the nobility of my soul, О most pure one, and I 
tremble at the thought of the interrogation, when the Word will examine the state 
of my worthiness. 
Glory ..., Beset now by the tempest of transgressions, I have been brought 
down into the abyss of despair; yet grant me thy hand, О pure one, and lead me to 
repentance. 
Both now ..., Deliver thy servant from Gehenna and every other threat at the 
hour of judgment, О most immaculate one, and cause me to share in the kingdom 
of thy Son and God. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
The waters of unseemly deeds have flooded my wretched soul, О pure one; 
wherefore, beset by worldly thoughts, I cry out in pain: Spurn not thy servant, О 
Lady! 
Noetic beasts have now mercilessly surrounded me and have striven pitilessly 
to seize my lowly soul, О all-immaculate one; yet do thou, О most pure one, break 
their soul-destroying jaws. 
Glory ..., О all-pure Lady, be thou merciful to thy servant, I pray, and rescue 
thy people from the coming threat, that we may cry out to thee in thanksgiving: 
Glory to Thee, О Queen of all! 
Both now ..., When the Bridegroom will come at night to judge the earth, О 
most pure one, then be thou well-pleased that I may go forth to meet Him with a 
lighted lamp, and may worship His coming. 
ODE V 
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
Many dogs have truly set themselves against me, and a horde of evil spirits 
have surrounded me; yet set their counsels now at naught, О most pure one. 
Having dug now a pit for me, the evil one strives to cast me into it; yet with 
thy right hand, О Lady, may he fall into the pit which he hath made. 
Glory ..., Let me not be denounced by the wrath of thy Son at the time of His 
coming, neither let me be punished by His anger, О all-hymned one; but save me 
by thine entreaties. 
Both now ..., Behold my weakness, behold the lowliness of my soul, О pure 
one, and the uprising of mine incorporeal enemies; and deliver me from their 
harm. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
At the behest of the Creator of all, when my soul must needs part from the 
flesh, О all-immaculate and all-hymned Theotokos, free me from the hands of 
those who hate me. 
With streams of compunction dry up the turbulent rivers of my wicked deeds, 
О Birthgiver of God, and guide me to the waters of tranquility on the day of 
judgment. 
Glory ..., Thou knowest the weakness of my soul, the feebleness of my mind 
and the infirmity of my flesh, О most pure one. Wherefore, save thy servant, for 
thee have I acquired as an invincible ally. 
Both now ..., Grant me streams of spiritual tears, О most immaculate Lady, 
whereby I may wash away the mire of my transgressions, the tumult of the 
passions and the defilement of my body. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
О Lady who bore the Merciful One within thy womb, have pity on me who 
flee beneath thy protection and with all my soul ask thy divine help, and grant 
mercy unto me when we will stand before the Author of creation, О pure one, 
and deliver me from everlasting fire and all condemnation. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The waters of transgressions have been poured out upon me and my soul 
drowns, O pure one, and the uttermost abyss hath engulfed me; yet rescue me 
from its threefold billows. 
Sprinkle me with the blood which flowed from the side of thine Offspring and 
by the multitude of thy mercies; wash thou and cleanse me of all defilement with 
streams of tears. 
Glory ..., Grant thou contrition to my soul and humility to my heart, О all- 
pure one, that I may be delivered from all the wiles of those who ever pitilessly 
pursue me. 
Both now ..., As thou art merciful, О Lady Mother of God, grant mercy to 
those who with faith cry out to thy Son: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
With the might of thy Son thou hast broken the arrows of the archer, О pure 
one. Let his unrighteousness now descend upon his own head, that I may cry out: 
All ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages! 
With thy light do thou illumine my darkened heart, О maiden, and with the 
sword of light open thou the portals of light to me who cry: All ye works of the 
Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Glory ..., Falling into the sleep of death, I lie in the grave of despondency; yet 
do thou thyself raise me up, О Virgin, and grant that I may chant with vigilance: 
All ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages! 
Both now ..., О pure one, cease thou never to pray for those who honor thee, 
that, delivered in compunction from the snares of the devil, we may cry out to thy 
Son: All ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern 
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to 
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not 
known a man. 
The turbulence of the passions and the turmoil of vile thoughts bestorm my 
soul, and evil men ever smite me like a tempest; yet as thou lovest mankind, О 
Virgin, quickly deliver me from my besetting needs 
О my lowly soul, leave off thy wicked deeds and cease from doing evil and 
angering God; but earnestly embrace His commandments, for thou hast the 
Theotokos directing thy ways. 
Glory ..., As thou hast given birth to the Lord of all, free me from the passions 
and from grievous sins, and in thy surpassing loving-kindness enrich me wholly 
with good works, that, rejoicing, I may magnify thee, О all-immaculate one. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., The end approacheth, О my soul, judgment is at the door! 
Forsake thy shameful works and undertake to live a good life; for thou hast the 
Theotokos as thine ally, delivering thee from all oppression. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion. The rest as usual, and the dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of compunction, in Tone III:  
О my soul, while sojourning on the earth, repent, for dust doth not chant in 
the grave, nor doth it deliver us from transgressions; but cry out to Christ God: О 
Thou Who knowest the heart of man, I have sinned against Thee! Before Thou 
condemnest me, have pity, О God, and have mercy upon me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
How long, О my soul, shalt thou remain in thine offenses? How long shalt 
thou put repentance aside? Be thou mindful of the coming judgment, and cry out 
to Christ God: О Thou Who knowest the heart of man, I have sinned! О sinless 
Lord, have mercy upon me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou art our refuge and strength O Theotokos, the mighty help of all the 
world: by thy supplications do thou protect thy servants from every want, O thou 
who alone art blessed 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
At the dread judgment I shall denounce myself, there being no need for 
accusers, and shall condemn myself, there being no need for witnesses; for the 
books of my conscience will be opened, and the things I have done in secret will 
be exposed. Wherefore, О God Who wilt examine my deeds at that universal trial, 
cleanse me and save me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Thou knowest the depth of mine offenses, О Lord. Grant me a helping hand, 
as Thou didst to Peter, and save me. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Ye shine forth in faith, О all-radiant beacons, holy physicians 
of the infirm, all-famed passion-bearers; for ye were undaunted by the wounds 
inflicted by the torturers and cast down the ungodliness of the idols, having the 
Cross as a truly invincible trophy. 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Accept me who with faith flees beneath thy protection, О Lady, and despise 
me not, neither disdain me who entreat thee in repentance, О good one. Receive 
the supplication which cometh from mine unworthy mouth, and by thy mediation 
deliver me from all snares, that I may cry out to thee with boldness: Rejoice, О 
joyous one! 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
Fleeing under thy protection, we cry out with faith from the depths of our 
heart: О divinely blessed prophet and Forerunner, quell the tumults of perils and 
misfortunes and the waves of infirmities, and foil the wily counsels of the enemy, 
asking great mercy for us. 
Shaking off thy despondency by repentance before thy departure, О wretched 
soul, turn thou with weeping, crying out to the innocent Jesus, the Lover of 
mankind: I have sinned against Thee, О Master, but in that Thou art full of 
loving-kindness, save me by the prayers of the holy Forerunner, in that Thou 
alone art sinless. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Beyond understanding and unapproachable is the dread mystery of God 
wrought in thee, O divinely joyous Lady; for having conceived the Infinite One, 
thou didst give birth to Him, clad in the flesh taken from thy most pure blood. 
Him do thou ever entreat as thy Son, O pure one, that our souls be saved.  
Canon of repentance, to our Lord Jesus Christ & His martyrs, the acrostic 
whereof is “Hearken unto my groaning, О Word of God,” the composition 
of Joseph, in Tone III:  
ODE I 
Irmos: Wondrous art Thou, O God, * Who gloriously workest wonders, * 
Who didst fashion the earth from the abyss, * and didst cover the chariots 
and save the people who sing to Thee * as our King and God. 
Before the end, О ye faithful, let us weep for ourselves with all our soul. The 
Bridegroom approacheth; let us light our deeds as though they were radiant lamps, 
that together we may enter the divine bridal-chamber. 
Repenting with all his soul, Manasseh of old was saved; for he cried out to the 
one Master from the midst of his fetters. Him do thou emulate, О my soul, and 
thou shalt easily find salvation. 
To the martyrs: While the divine spiritual athletes endured the blinding of their 
eyes, the severing of their hands, the uprooting of their tongues, the amputation 
of their feet, and the breaking of their legs and arms, they gave thanks unto Jesus 
Christ. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
To the martyrs: О holy martyrs, the shrine of your relics hath been revealed to 
be the cure of all of us, the faithful, whence we who ever honor you as is meet 
draw forth healing of our souls and bodies. 
Theotokion: О all-hymned Virgin, the noetic jar which held Christ, the Manna 
of immortality: Deliver me from the bitterness of the soul-corrupting passions, 
that with faith I may piously glorify thee. 
Another canon, of the holy forerunner, in Tone III: 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
О Forerunner of the Lord, godly offspring of a barren womb: Pray to God, 
that I may produce the fruits of the virtues, and loose the barrenness of my sin, 
dispelling the gloom from my mind. 
By faith thou wast revealed to be a star preceding the great Sun of glory on 
earth, Who hath illumined the whole world. Wherefore, entreat Him, О 
Forerunner, that He enlighten my soul, which hath been darkened by evil 
thoughts. 
Prophet, who by the divine Spirit announced beforehand to those in Hades 
the Light Who was drawing nigh: By thy prayers give life to my deadened soul, 
and raise me up from my transgressions as from a grave, I pray, О glorious 
Forerunner. 
Theotokion: With the archangels and angels, and all the saints, entreat the 
Lord Who through thee revealed Himself to us, we pray, О Virgin, that we who 
confess thee to be the true Theotokos may be delivered from misfortunes. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O barren and infertile soul, * bring forth a crop of glorious fruit and 
joyously cry aloud: * I have been firmly established by Thee O God; * there 
is none holy and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord. 
I have senselessly broken the law of God, and must needs be condemned. 
And I know not what I shall do. О most righteous Judge, have pity and save me in 
Thy loving-kindness. 
О greatly Merciful One Who lovest mankind, Thou Dayspring of the East: 
Shine forth the light of righteousness upon me, I pray, rescuing me from the 
gloom of the passions and the darkness of torment. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
To the martyrs: О holy martyrs, ye have been revealed to be inhabitants of the 
noetic land, fruitful trees of paradise, wellsprings of divine water, and chalices 
pouring forth a holy drink. 
To the martyrs: Bearing a single character in many bodies, О passion-bearers 
and martyrs, preaching the indivisible Trinity ye conquered hordes of the enemy, 
and the prince of this world. 
Theotokion: О most pure Virgin Mother, Sovereign Lady of all: Render Christ 
merciful unto all of us, who repent and flee unto Him, and who desire to receive 
release from our transgressions. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
As thou art the voice of the Word, О Baptist, direct now the cries of those 
who honor thee unto Him, and by thy mediation grant us remission of sins. 
I have sinned against Thee and defiled my soul О Savior, having committed 
iniquity and transgressions. Wherefore, I pray Thee: Have pity on me for the sake 
of him who baptized Thee. 
I beseech thee, О Forerunner, thou child of the desert and guide of the new 
people of God; guide me to the paths of repentance, who through pleasures have 
gone astray in the wilderness. 
Theotokion: With the apostles, the sacred prophets, the martyrs and the 
heavenly hosts pray to thy Son, О most pure one, that He have pity on us who 
hymn thee. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine 
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come forth 
from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely 
overshadowed. 
О Christ God, Who of old poured forth water from the rock for the 
disobedient and gainsaying people, quenching their thirst: From my stony soul 
draw forth a drop of compunction that I may be washed clean. 
О Physician of the sick, as a gesture of compassion cure my heart of the 
passions, applying repentance to it as a dressing of divine medicine, О Savior, in 
that Thou art good, that with faith I may glorify Thee. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers, mercifully putting away all thought of 
friendship for the body, ye gave yourselves over to those who would torture you; 
wherefore, ye became close friends of the Creator. 
To the martyrs: Ye endured the agonizing wounds of multifarious torments, О 
spiritual athletes of Christ, and received the grace of the gifts of the Spirit; and ye 
drive away the chronic pangs of our passions. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, О maiden of great renown, from whom God the Word 
was born, releasing us from irrational and unseemly deeds! Rejoice, О radiant 
cloud who dispellest the clouds of our despondency! 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
О Forerunner of the Lord, I pray thee who art the voice of the Word Who 
appeared in the flesh: Deliver me from irrational actions for as is meet, I honor 
thee with my words and bless thee with faith. 
Sigh, О my soul, and cry out to God, thy Creator: I have sinned! Cleanse me, 
О Christ, and at the entreaties of the divine Forerunner deliver me from dreadful 
torment, misfortunes and tribulations. 
Rescue me, who am drowning in the many waves of grievous passions, and am 
cruelly beset by storms, ever foundering therein, О Baptist, and guide me to the 
harbor of repentance. 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate Mother of God, О chariot more exalted than 
the cherubim: With the immaterial ministers and all the saints entreat Christ to 
Whom thou hast given birth, that He save me, the accursed one. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Rising at dawn, we hymn Thee, О Word, * Thou only-begotten Son 
of God. * Grant us Thy peace, and have mercy on us * who with faith hymn 
and worship Thee. 
Sprinkling me with the hyssop of repentance, purify me of the defilements of 
the passions, О Jesus, that I may appear before Thee clean when Thou shalt judge 
all mankind in Thy righteous judgment. 
The wounds of my most wretched soul have festered, О Savior. О Healer of 
the sick and Bestower of good things, heal Thou and save me in Thy surpassing 
mercy. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
To the martyrs: On earth, the bodies of the passion-bearers were broken like 
vessels of clay, but the might of their souls was wholly strengthened and illumined 
by the power of Christ. 
To the martyrs: The blood which the saints shed hath sanctified the whole 
earth; and given drink to the souls of the faithful, clearly drying up the surging 
torrents of vanity. 
Theotokion: By thy birthgiving thou didst render barren the curse upon our 
forefather, О maiden, and hast poured forth rivers of blessing upon us, who bless 
and glorify thee with faith. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
On earth thou didst manifestly live like an angel in the flesh, О blessed one; 
wherefore, I pray to thee: Free my soul from, carnal-mindedness. 
О Forerunner of the Lord, save me, who have fallen into the abyss of sin, who 
have defiled my soul with pleasures, and am in distress, yet flee unto thee. 
Thou wast revealed to be more exalted than the prophets, О prophet, for thou 
thyself didst see Him Whom thou didst proclaim. Him do thou unceasingly 
entreat, that He enlighten our souls. 
Theotokion: О divinely joyous one, who by the indwelling of the Word wast 
revealed to be more spacious than the heavens: Free me from the sins which 
smother me. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The abyss of the passions and a storm of adverse winds * have risen 
up against me. * But do Thou make haste, O Savior, * to save me, and 
deliver me from corruption, * as Thou didst deliver the prophet from the 
sea-monster. 
I have been darkened by the gloom of sin and lie wholly dormant. О Christ 
God, Who wast once wounded by a spear for my sake, have pity on me in Thy 
tender compassion. 
I groan, yet I remain sunk in evils; I weep, yet I tremble not before the 
judgment; I experience pain, but remain unfeeling. О Word of God, have pity and 
save me by Thy good judgments! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
To the martyrs: Wholly mute, like lambs which neither bleat nor sound, О all-
glorious spiritual athletes, ye were led to wounding and slaughter, hymning Christ. 
To the martyrs: With joyous soul ye were cast as food to the wild beasts and 
hurled into the depths of the sea; wherefore, О spiritual athletes, Christ hath 
adorned you with imperishable crowns. 
Theotokion: О portal of those saved by faith, gate through which He alone 
Who became incarnate for us hath entered: Open the doors of righteousness unto 
us who hymn thee with faith. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 
In the waters thou didst baptize the Torrent of sweetness, Who bowed His 
head beneath thy hand. Him do thou entreat, О wise one, that He send down the 
water of compunction upon me who have greatly sinned. 
In the river, О Forerunner, thou didst wash Jesus, the Lover of mankind and 
Abyss of loving-kindness Who covereth the chambers of the heavens with waters. 
Him do thou entreat, that He pour forth remission upon me. 
“Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!” didst thou cry aloud, О 
Forerunner. Wherefore, grant that those who honor thee with love and flee 
beneath thine honored protection may receive it. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, who didst lend thy flesh to the Creator: With 
the heavenly hosts, all the prophets, the apostles and martyrs, beseech Him to 
have pity and save me. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the flame of the furnace * and save the Children 
from being consumed: * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord 
the God of our fathers. 
I have stripped myself of the garments of incorruption and clothed myself in 
deeds of ungodliness; wherefore, I cry out to Thee: О Compassionate God, make 
me splendid in the raiment of the virtues. 
I have sullied myself with lustful gazes and defiled myself by unseemly 
touching, and am become vile in Thy sight. О Jesus, accept me as Thou didst the 
prodigal! 

--- PAGE 16 ---
To the martyrs: Loving the heavenly life, ye endured many pangs, О warriors 
of Christ, divine luminaries; wherefore, with faith ye are called blessed. 
To the martyrs: Having been enlightened with the splendor of martyrdom, ye 
shine forth more brightly than the sun, driving away all the gloom of ungodliness, 
О holy martyrs. 
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth to the Upholder of all, О pure Ever-
virgin Theotokos, deliver me from sin and the gloom of ignorance which holdeth 
me. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: * 
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: * 
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
О Forerunner and Baptist of Christ, star of the Sun, my soul, which hath been 
darkened and blinded by slothfulness, do thou illumine me, guiding me to the 
path of repentance. 
Mindful of the hour of judgment, I am wholly seized with fear; for I wallow in 
a multitude of unseemly deeds. But stand forth before me, О thou who didst 
baptize the Lord, and deliver me from the impending fire. 
O intercessor for my life, О Forerunner my helper, preserve and protect me 
from enemies, visible and invisible, and cause me to share in the heavenly 
kingdom. 
Theotokion: О Virgin Theotokos, with the prophets, apostles and martyrs 
beseech thy Son, that from impending need He deliver us who ever honor thee. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: God is unceasingly glorified on high by the angels, * O ye heaven of 
heavens, * ye earth and mountains, ye plains and abysses, * and all the race 
of mankind, * with hymns as to the Creator and Redeemer, * bless ye, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
I have not the fear of Thee dwelling in my heart, and, devoid of conscience, I 
have brought carnal pleasure to fulfillment; and trembling before Thy judgment, 
О King of all, I beseech Thee: Disdain me not, who now repent. 
Washing earthly sin from me by repentance, grant that I may pass over to the 
holy land wherein the meek dwell, О greatly Merciful One Who wast born on 
earth from the Virgin without sin. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
To the martyrs: Your feet, dyed in your own blood, trampled the enemy 
underfoot, and in holiness now traverse the heavens, О all-glorious passion-
bearers of Christ, the God of all. 
To the martyrs: With care ye arrayed yourselves for struggles and great battles, 
and stripped the enemy bare, clothing him in shame; wherefore, ye join chorus in 
the heavens, О glorious crowned passion-bearers. 
Theotokion: Loving thee, the beauty of Jacob, the Lord, Who is beauteous in 
comeliness, made His abode within thy womb, О all-immaculate one, enlightening 
human nature with beauties and gifts transcending understanding. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Thou didst preach the Lamb of God Who taketh away our sins, О godly John 
the Forerunner. Him do thou beseech, that He loose the burden of my sins and 
grant unto me the portion of the saved. 
From the furnace of burning flame and the outer darkness which is devoid of 
light deliver me who am wholly held fast in the darkness of evil deeds, for the sake 
of Thy glorious and divine Baptist, I pray Thee, О Word of God, Who art wholly 
without beginning. 
О divine prophet of the Lord, who through repentance preached fruitfulness 
to empty and barren souls: Clear my thorn-choked soul of all the pleasures, that I 
may produce the grain of good works. 
Theotokion: As thou art the Mother of God, with the holy angels, the 
prophets, apostles and martyrs pray that those who ever confess thee to be the 
Theotokos may be delivered from misfortunes, tribulations, and all the torments 
which are to come. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Blessed is the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
our salvation * in the house of David His child, * for the sake of His loving-
kindness; * the Dayspring from on high hath therein visited us, * guiding 
us to the path of peace. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Now is the right acceptable time and the day of purification! Turn, О my soul, 
and make it thy will henceforth to bring forth fruits of repentance, lest the dread 
axe of death find thee barren and, having cut thee down like the fig-tree of old, 
sendeth thee into the fire. 
Like the rich man of old I wallow in pleasures, lacking any great love for my 
neighbor; and I am not frightened by the unquenchable fire. Wherefore, soften 
the hardness of my soul, О Master, that in the end I who am darkened may, if but 
a little, be enlightened by loving-kindness. 
To the martyrs: Having been sealed by the divine blood of Christ, mightily 
suffering lashings with faith, О martyrs, ye have laid low the infidel foe and 
rescued many people from vile delusion by your divine feats, illumining them with 
the light of the knowledge of God 
To the martyrs: О godly martyrs of Christ, ye were shown to be sharp-edged 
swords cutting down the hordes of the enemy, vessels containing the radiance of 
the Holy Trinity, lamps shedding the light of piety upon the faithful, and true 
warriors of the noetic Sion. 
Theotokion: The prophet foresaw thee as the radiant cloud from which Christ 
God, the great Sun, appeared unto us, enlightening those who before were 
darkened. Beseech Him, О good one, that He dispel the clouds of my passions 
and illumine me with divine light. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern 
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to 
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not 
known a man. 
Having entered the tabernacle of the law, thou didst richly gaze upon the 
splendor of divine grace, О wise prophet, enlightening the ends of the earth and 
dispelling the darkness of ignorance; wherefore, we honor thee. 
In that thou art a martyr of Christ, the godly one who baptized Him, a beacon 
of repentance, the dawning of piety, the mediator between the Old and New 
Covenants, enlighten my humbled soul, which hath grown old through evil, 
renewing it with divine understanding. 
At the hour of horror, the hour of terror, the hour of condemnation, from the 
threats that await me beyond do thou deliver me who am condemned, О wise 
one, for thou hast the Bridegroom, the Savior of our souls, as a friend hearkening 
to thy supplications. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Theotokion: As the Mother of God, as the Mother of the Word of God Who 
was born from thee in the flesh, О pure one, ever pray with the incorporeal ones, 
with the apostles and prophets, the holy hierarchs and martyrs, that He have pity 
on the world, О most pure Virgin Mother. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of compunction, in Tone III: 
Gather the scattered thoughts of my mind, O Lord, and purify my barren and 
wasted heart, granting me repentance as didst Thou to Peter, that like the Publican 
I may sigh in sorrow, and like the Harlot shed tears, that I may cry with a loud 
voice unto Thee: Save me, O God, for Thou alone art compassionate and the 
Lover of mankind. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
While offering a multitude of hymns, I am found to be sinning; for chanting 
hymns with my tongue, my soul doth dwell on wicked thoughts. But do Thou, O 
Christ God set both aright through repentance, and have mercy upon me.  
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: The warriors of Christ refused to be intimidated by emperors 
and tyrants, and right boldly and manfully they confessed Him, the Lord God of 
all, our King; and they pray for our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
 
Without seed thou didst conceive by the Holy Spirit; we glorify thee and sing 
thy praises: Rejoice, O most holy Virgin! 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III: 
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy 
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who 
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom! 
I have acquired a soul defiled by the pleasures of life, and, wholly desperate, I 
approach Thy compassions and earnestly cry out to Thee, О Christ, Who alone 
knowest the secret things: Cleanse me in Thy loving-kindness, О Lord! 
As the mediator between the Old and the New Covenants, О divine Baptist, 
having renewed me who have grown old through transgressions, by thy 
supplications grant that I may walk the paths of repentance without stumbling, for 
they lead straight to the kingdom of Christ, О all-praised one. 
To the martyrs: Fighting the good tight, О valiant spiritual athletes, ye endured 
countless myriads of pangs; and thus ye ever ease the pain of all and dispel the 
harm wrought by the evil spirits. Wherefore, we glorify you with faith, О holy 
ones. 
Glory ..., The Unity in three Hypostases is truly light and life, the Creator of 
all, Whom we glorify; for the Master and Lord is known to be the one God in 
three Hypostases - the Father, the Son and the Spirit - the Unity which sustain- 
eth all things. 
Both now ..., О Virgin Mother, have pity on me who ever sin and anger the 
good God, and by examples of repentance make me steadfast now, in that thou 
art good, that, having escaped the torments which are to come, I may earnestly 
hymn thy supplication, О maiden. 
 
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
  
