--- PAGE 1 ---
TUESDAY EVENING: TONE III 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Creation was transformed by Thy crucifixion, О Word: the sun withdrew its 
rays in fear and the veil of the temple was rent in twain; and every one of the 
faithful is saved. Wherefore, we glorify Thine immeasurably abundant noetic 
riches. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
God the Master, Who in His compassion assumed our flesh, having been well-
pleased to be nailed to the Tree, and lifted up thereon bodily, hath thereby, in the 
tender compassion of His mercy, raised us up who were cast down. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
The world was renewed by the drops of divinely shed blood and water which 
flowed from Thy side, О Lord; for Thou dost wash away all sins with water, and 
as Thou art compassionate, dost grant us to partake of forgiveness by Thy blood. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Lying upon the bed of my negligence, I have reached the end of my Life in 
slothfulness; and I fear the hour of my departure. Yet, rousing me to repentance 
by thy supplication, О maiden, save me. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Heal thou the sicknesses of my heart, bringing an end to the deception of my 
mind, О pure one, and grant that with a pure heart I may hymn thee, and ask 
grace, and find mercy on the day of judgment. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Cast off the heavy burden of evil, and draw nigh, weeping and crying aloud: О 
pure Virgin, grant that I may bear the easy yoke of thy Son and God. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, O most pure one, * when thou 
didst behold thy Son upon the Cross; * whereupon thou didst cry aloud: * “Show 
me not to be childless, O my Son and my God, ** Thou Who hast kept me a 
Virgin even after birthgiving!”  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone III: 
I bow down, О Christ, before Thy precious Cross: the guardian of the world, 
the salvation of us sinners, the great purification and boast of the whole world. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
The tree of disobedience put forth death for the world; but the Tree of the 
Cross hath put forth life and incorruption. Wherefore, we worship the crucified 
Lord, crying: Let the light of Thy countenance be signed upon us! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: The prophets, the apostles of Christ and the martyrs 
enlightened and taught the erring nations to hymn the consubstantial Trinity, and 
made the children of mankind companions of the angels. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross ...”:  
Stavrotheotokion: When Thy Mother, the unblemished Ewe-lamb who gave 
birth to Thee, saw Thee lifted up upon the Cross, О my Christ, she lamented and 
cried out, weeping: “Show me not to be childless, whom Thou didst preserve pure 
even after giving birth!” 
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
TUESDAY NIGHT: TONE III 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos  
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Knowing thee, the Mother of God, to be a wellspring of loving-kindness and 
mercy, approaching thy goodness, I pray: Grant me compunction, that I may 
grieve and weep over my transgressions, О all-pure Lady. 
Grant me drops of spiritual tears to wash away all the defilement of my acts 
and wicked thoughts, to cleanse my soul of impurity and make me a temple of the 
divine Spirit. 
Glory ..., Beset by the waves and threefold billows of my transgressions, and 
ever cruelly drowned by the works of the adversary, sinking now into the abyss of 
destruction, I cry to thee, О most immaculate one: Save me! 
Both now ..., For the sake of thy tender compassion, О Lady of all, have 
mercy on my wretched soul, and deliver me from everlasting fire and the assault 
of the demons, for I flee now beneath thy protection, О Theotokos. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
With divine light illumine my mind, which hath been darkened by evil 
thoughts, О all-hymned one; for thou hast given birth to the everlasting Light 
Who hath shone forth from the Father. 
Tripping the feet of my soul, the enemy of the righteous hath caused me to fall 
to the ground; yet with thy right hand, О pure Lady, raise me up again. 
Glory ..., With the voice of the publican I cry to thee, wretch that I am: 
Cleanse me, О Lady, and by thy supplication grant remission of sins unto thy 
servant. 
Both now ..., Heal thou the wounds of my soul, О Lady, and still the most 
turbulent waves of my thoughts; and grant me the armor of peace. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
I have defiled my flesh with pleasures and luxuries, and have besmirched the 
purity of my soul with vile thoughts, darkening my mind. О Lady, disdain not thy 
servant. 
Be thou my deliverance, refuge and might, the horn of my salvation, О pure 
helper, ever delivering me from all sorrow and putting all mine enemies to shame. 
Glory ..., I am now beset by many perils, wretch that I am, and am ever 
engulfed by the wiles of the demons; yet I flee to thee now; by thy fervent 
supplication save me, thy servant. 
Both now ..., The night of the passions, devoid of light, embraceth me, wretch 
that I am; yet by thy light, О good one, dispel the clouds of my soul and guide me 
to the light of the precepts of God, О all-immaculate one. 
ODE V 
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have 
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the 
King of peace.’ 
The time of my life hath vanished like smoke, and I have arrived at the 
gateway of death. I fear the assault of the demons, for I have ever done their 
works. О all-immaculate one, have pity and save me! 
Drying up the abyss of mine evils, О Virgin, grant me rivers of tears. Quench 
all the flame of my passions, О maiden, and grant that I may be delivered from 
fire and other torments on the day of judgment. 
Glory ..., With the oil of thy mercy heal my soul which is tormented with the 
pain of my sins, and grant that I may ever observe the precepts of thy Son in 
humility, that I may receive His goodness. 
Both now ..., “Thy divine Church, stripped of its bridal raiment, О my Son, 
hath been arrayed in the holy blood which flowed from Thy side. And I, 
beholding all Thy pain on the Cross, do likewise suffer!” said the Mother of the 
Word, lamenting. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Son of God, assuming flesh from thy pure blood, hath shown thee, О 
Bride of God, to be a great refuge; wherefore, be thou merciful to thy servants. 
О good one, with thy radiance illumine the eyes of my heart which have been 
darkened by unseemly thoughts; make me a child of the Light, and cause me to 
dwell in a place of light. 
Glory ..., Waves of passionate thoughts ever batter me, О most pure one, and 
the tempests of the evil spirits engulf me; yet set me firmly upon the rock of 
dispassion. 
Both now ..., I have fallen asleep in the death of my soul, and lie in the grave 
of despondency; but grant me thy hand, I pray, and raise me up, guiding me to the 
life of repentance. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
We who have acquired the Cross of thy Son as a staff of power, О Theotokos, 
thereby cast down the arrogance of the enemy, magnifying thee unceasingly with 
love. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
О pure one, with strength do thou gird my soul, which hath grown weak 
through sins, and save me who cry out to thy Son: О God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou! 
Fearing the hour of death because of eternal and everlasting torment, I fall 
down before thee: О Lady, Birthgiver of God, save me from the snares of those 
who pursue me! 
Glory ..., О Theotokos who didst contain the infinite God within thy womb, 
free my mind, which hath been confined by many transgressions, from their 
condemnation. 
Both now ..., The race of mankind entreateth thee, О Theotokos: О Lady, 
have mercy on thy servants who with faith cry out to thy Son: О God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having truly emulated the prodigal and ended my whole life in sins, I now cry 
out: I have sinned against thee! О Lady, make me as one of the hirelings of thy 
Son and Creator, that I may glorify thee throughout all ages! 
My soul hath been filled with evils, and I have been reckoned with all who go 
down into the pit; yet do thou, О Virgin Theotokos, lead me up from the pit of 
the passions and from the miry clay of mine evils. 
Glory ..., Pray thou to Christ, О Theotokos who hast given birth to Him from 
thy holy womb, that He grant me forgiveness of my manifold transgressions, that 
I may chant: О all ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages! 
Both now ..., When my soul must needs depart from this life at the command 
of God, from the snares of those who pursue us, О most pure one, rescue those 
who cry out to thee: О all ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern 
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to 
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not 
known a man. 
The race of mankind, now enriched by thine invincible supplication, О most 
immaculate one, crieth out day and night: Cease thou never to entreat thy Creator 
and Son, that He take pity on those who hymn thee. 
The darts of unseemly passions have wounded my soul with demonic assaults, 
and ever trouble my mind with the arrows of adverse thought; wherefore, heal 
mine incurable wounds, О maiden. 
Glory ..., О pure Bride of God, quickly remove from me the wounds inflicted 
upon me by the enemies who war against me, for, wretch that I am, I can no 
longer bear their assaults, their great wickedness and insolence; yet hasten thou to 
deliver me. 
Both now ..., Thou knowest the weakness of my lowly body, the wounds of 
my soul, the groaning of my heart, and the error and deception of my mind; 
wherefore by thy tender compassion grant me healing of them all. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion. The rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone III: 
The Cross was planted in the earth yet touched the heavens, not because it 
reached the full stature of a tree, but because thereon Thou didst fulfill all things. 
Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship the footstool of His feet; * 
for He is holy. 
Thou wast uplifted upon the cypress, the pine and the cedar, О Lamb of God, 
that Thou mightest save those who worship Thy voluntary crucifixion with faith. 
Glory be to Thee, О Christ God! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Having obtained the Cross of thy Son as a staff of strength, 
O Theotokos, therewith we cast down the arrogance of the enemy, and with love 
unceasingly magnify thee.  
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
О Lord Who wast buffeted for the race of mankind, yet wast not stirred to 
wrath, free our life from corruption, and save us. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
Beholding Thine infinite authority and voluntary crucifixion, the angelic 
armies marveled: How is He who is invisible wounded in the flesh, desiring to 
deliver mankind from corruption? Wherefore, we cry out to Thee as the Bestower 
of life: Glory to Thy loving-kindness, О Christ! 
In the same melody: 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Arraying yourselves in the full armor of Christ, and wielding 
the sword of faith, as martyrs ye hewed down hordes of the enemy; for, in hope 
of life, ye earnestly endured all the threats and wounds of the tyrants of old. 
Wherefore, ye have received crowns, О stouthearted martyrs of Christ. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in the same melody: 
Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure unwedded Mother, O Christ, upon seeing Thee 
hanging dead upon the Cross, said, weeping maternally: “How hath the iniquitous 
and thankless council of the Jews repaid Thy many and great wonders, O my Son, 
Thou Who hast filled them with Thy gifts? I hymn Thy divine condescension!”  

--- PAGE 8 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Awed by the beauty of thy virginity ...”: 
Accepting crucifixion and death, О Christ our Savior, Thou didst pour forth 
immortal life upon us and freed the world from corruption. Wherefore, О 
Bestower of life Who lovest mankind, we glorify Thy salvific sufferings, whereby 
all of us who possess Thy Cross as peace and an invincible weapon, are saved. 
Thou didst endure the infamy of the Cross, О Master Who dost transcend all 
creation, that Thou mightest honor me who before was in grievous dishonor. And 
Thou wast pierced in Thy side by a spear, О Long-suffering One, desiring to 
deliver me, Thy creature, from corruption. I hymn Thy great tender compassion 
and goodness, О Lover of mankind! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When the pure Virgin, Thine immaculate Mother, who 
knew not wedlock, beheld Thee uplifted upon the Tree, О Master, she cried 
aloud: “Woe is me, О my most sweet Son! How hath the most iniquitous council 
condemned Thee, the Creator and Master of all, to the Tree? I hymn Thine utter 
goodness!” 
ODE I 
Canon of the precious and life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “By 
Thy pangs Thou hast brought an end to the pangs of men,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone III:  
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Thou didst cause the greatly painful passions to cease, О Word, and didst save 
mankind, whom the adversary wounded of old, yet who piously worship Thine 
ineffable dispensation. 
He who by deceit bound us through the violation of the commandment in 
paradise is bound by the unbreakable bonds wherewith Thou wast bound, having 
become incarnate of Thine own will, О Lord and Lover of mankind, loosing our 
transgressions. 
To the martyrs: Seeing creation unfortunately overwhelmed by the deceptions 
of the demons, the passion-bearers of great renown revealed themselves to be 
calm harbors for the faithful, drowning all the power of the prideful one in the 
streams of their blood. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
To the martyrs: The choirs of the martyrs, having radiantly joined the ranks on 
high, are ever illumined by the splendors of the uncreated Godhead, enlightening 
those on earth who with faith glorify His wonders. 
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be more exalted than the heavenly ranks, 
О most pure one, who on earth hast given birth to God the Word, Who in His 
goodness hath led us up to the heavens by His sufferings and precious Cross. 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is “I 
offer a third hymn to the Theotokos,” in Tone III: 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters ..., 
Thee whom the prophet Habbakuk foresaw in the Spirit as the mountain 
overshadowed, do I beseech: О most pure one, overshadow me who am pierced 
through by passions and am in the shadow of death, that I may be freed of the 
passions which assail me. (Twice) 
With the sprinkling of the divine streams which flow from the divine side of 
thy Son, wash clean the wounds of my heart, that, as is meet, I may magnify and 
glorify thee, the ever-blessed and most immaculate one. 
Thou hast given birth to the Word Who is the equal of the One Who begat 
Him, and hath made the essence of man divine. Entreat Him, О pure one, that He 
grant divine consolation unto me who am confused and weakened by the wiles of 
the enemy. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
By the Tree the assembly of the Jews slayed Thee, Who in the essence of Thy 
divinity art dispassionate, yet in Thy goodness became subject to suffering in the 
flesh, rendering us immortal. 
О Word Who suspended the earth upon the waters, of Thine own will Thou 
wast suspended upon the Tree, leading up to the heavens me who have fallen into 
the pit of evil. 
To the martyrs: Replete with wounds, O all-praised martyrs of Christ, ye stand 
before the Lord, receiving rewards from His most generous hand. 
To the martyrs: With joyous soul the martyrs received wounds, bringing utter 
grief upon the serpent and filling the angelic choirs with joy. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Beholding Christ uplifted upon the Cross, she who knew not 
wedlock said, weeping: “O Sun of glory, Thou hast set from before mine eyes, 
bringing light to those in darkness!” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all ..., 
О all-holy one, who art merciful, beseech Him Who is rich in ineffable mercy 
and compassions, that He have pity on us who are oppressed. (Twice) 
О pure Virgin, who art the dwelling-place of the Creator of all, entreat the 
Comforter to abide within me, for I have become a den for soul-corrupting 
thieves. 
In that thou bearest in thine arms Him Who holdeth all things in His divine 
hand, О Theotokos, look upon me, and deliver me from mine unseemly 
inclination toward the passions. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
Beaten about the head with a reed, Thou didst endure mockery, О Master 
Who dost truly surpass all honor, that Thou mayest honor me who have been 
dishonored by disobedience, О Christ Who lovest mankind. 
As the King of truth Thou wast crowned with a crown of thorns as Thou didst 
desire, О Long-suffering One, and Thou didst uproot thorny sin. I hymn Thy 
sufferings, О Savior! 
To the martyrs: О martyrs, ye remained unbroken by the infliction of wounds, 
breaking the deception of the enemy and trampling underfoot him who boasted 
beyond measure yet wholly fadeth away in his mindlessness. 
To the martyrs: Through your corruptible bodies ye acquired divine 
incorruption, by your sufferings steadfastly emulating the honored suffering of the 
Dispassionate One, О all-praised martyrs who have been reckoned with all the 
incorporeal ones. 
Theotokion: Once, the prophet beheld thee, О maiden, as the scroll whereon 
the finger of the Father inscribed the incarnate Word, Who with the spear hath 
rent asunder the record of our forefather’s sin, О most pure one. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love ..., 
As Thou didst endure wounds and slaughter, О only greatly merciful Christ, by 
the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, heal my soul, which hath been 
wounded by the afflictions of the ravenous demons. 
О Creator, my body is the creation of Thy hands, yet I have been broken by 
the malice of the serpent and the pleasures of life. Wherefore, by the divine 
supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, refashion me, О Christ, 
In a manner transcending description, thou hast given birth to the Word Who 
hath released mankind from all irrationality. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that 
He free me who am held captive by irrational passions, О only Ever-virgin. 
Thou dost ever pour forth healing upon us from thy hands, О thou who art 
wholly the tabernacle of Holiness, who art wholly filled with Light, and dost 
wholly exude the Myrrh of sweet savor, О most pure Bride of God. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
Thou wast uplifted upon the Tree like a lamb, О good One, offering Thyself 
to the Father as a sacrifice for us, О Almighty, and thereby abolishing idolatrous 
sacrifice. 
Pierced in the side with a spear, О Bestower of life, Thou pourest forth two 
streams of salvation upon those who declare Thee to be one of the Trinity, yet 
having two natures. 
To the martyrs: Through faith finding Thee to be a mighty fortress and 
unshakable rock, О Jesus, the mighty passion-bearers built themselves up as 
priceless stones. 
To the martyrs: Strengthened by the power of God through faith, ye made war 
upon all the cruel power of the deceiver, О passion-bearing martyrs, and have 
been crowned with splendor. 
Theotokion: In that thou hast given birth unto Christ without corruption, thou 
hast refashioned our nature, which of old had become corrupt through 
disobedience, О most holy Lady, thou intercessor for our souls. 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have 
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the 
King of peace.’ 
Transform the pangs of my flesh and the sickness of my soul, О Virgin; drive 
away the clouds of slothfulness, О cloud of the Light; and grant deliverance from 
evils unto me who petition and glorify thee with love. (Twice) 
Full of every sin, О Virgin, I now present thee as my mediatress and advocate 
before Him Who was born from thee. Be thou the surety and correction of life 
for me, and guidance to the ways of divine knowledge. 
Sanctify my mind, illumine my soul, and cause it to share in divine glory; for, 
lo! I have been filled with evils and enslaved by all manner of pleasures, and I bear 
a defiled conscience. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 
The lying serpent, who deceived me with the fruit of falsehood, caused me to 
be expelled from Eden; but Christ, having been willingly raised up upon the Tree 
hath restored mine ancient access thereto. 
By Thy wounded side, О Lord our Benefactor, he who wounded us was 
wounded and remained unhealed; but we, the faithful, have been healed by the 
wounds whereby Thou wast willingly wounded. 
To the martyrs: О most wise warriors of Christ, in the midst of the fire ye 
showed yourselves to be like roasted lambs, offered as a banquet to the God and 
King of all, inheriting ineffable gladness. 
To the martyrs: Drawing healing forth from inexhaustible treasuries, ye pour it 
forth in rivers, О passion-bearers; and causing the harm of the passions to dry up, 
ye give drink to the assemblies of the faithful. 
Theotokion: Beholding the death of the Word Who was incarnate from thy 
blood, О all-immaculate one, thou didst cry out as a mother and magnify Him 
Who is the Cause of life, О Virgin Lady. 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: О Lover of mankind, disdain not those * who have reached the end 
of the ages * and are assailed with destruction by the threefold billows of 
perils, * yet cry aloud: О Savior, save us, * as Thou didst save the prophet 
from the sea monster! 
Ever full of pride, I have surpassed the Pharisee in arrogance of mind, 
plunging headlong into the defiles of countless offenses. О only pure one, have 
pity on me who am brought grievously low. (Twice) 
O thou whose conceiving and birthgiving were most wondrous, show now thy 
mercies to be wondrous in me; for I have been conceived in iniquities and born a 
slave to pleasures. 
I cry out, weep and lament when I contemplate the dread judgment; for my 
deeds are evil. О Virgin Mother of God, who knewest not a man, intercede for me 
at the dreadful hour! 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
By Thy pangs Thou didst cause our pangs to cease, О Lover of mankind, and 
thou hast now brought to the life devoid of pain those who piously worship Thine 
honored sufferings, О God of all. 
When creation saw Thee crucified, О Christ, it quaked and trembled: the earth 
shook, the rocks split asunder, and the sun in its transit hid its light. 
To the martyrs: Submitting to the laws of Christ, the martyrs rejected the 
enticements of the iniquitous and, suffering in the midst of the tribunal, received 
crowns of glory. 
To the martyrs: Possessed of a will hotter than fire, ye were not consumed by 
the fire, О crowned passion-bearers of the Lord, crying aloud: Blessed art Thou, 
О God! 
Theotokion: Seeing Christ, to Whom thou hast given birth, lifted up upon the 
Cross, О most pure one, thou didst stand, crying out: “Show me not to be 
childless, whom Thou didst keep pure even after birthgiving!” 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: * 
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: * 
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
My works are of no avail for salvation, О Lady, for I heap sin upon sin, and 
evil upon evil. Wherefore, by thy prayers, О pure one, have pity and save me. 
(Twice) 
The trial is at hand, the judgment-seat is set forth in readiness. Prepare thyself, 
О my soul, and cry aloud: When Thou shalt sit in judgment, O Word, condemn 
me not, for the sake of the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee. 
Harvesting the fruits of sin and bringing forth a barren soul, I have been slain; 
yet I cry unto thee: Show me to be fruitful, О thou who by thy Fruit hast 
destroyed corruption. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace burnt not the children, * neither did the fire 
of the Godhead consume the Virgin, * wherefore with the faithful children 
we cry aloud: * 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord'. 
When Thou wast crucified, paradise was opened again, and the sword which 
was wielded against us was withdrawn, putting to shame the spear which pierced 
Thy holy side, О greatly merciful Christ. 
The adversary was wounded by Thy spear and fell, and fallen Adam is 
returned to life, crying out to Thee Who wast willingly slain, О Christ: I glorify 
Thee Who givest blessings, О my greatly merciful God! 
To the martyrs: The world is illumined by your contests, О spiritual athletes, 
and by your prowess and countless miracles, is delivered from the darkness of 
pain, crying out with faith: Bless the Lord, О ye works of the Lord! 
To the martyrs: He who of old boasted that he would destroy the earth and 
the sea is seen lying in humiliation beneath your feet, О saints; and with His life-
bearing right hand Christ adorneth you with imperishable crowns, О ever-glorious 
ones. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, thou hast given birth in time unto Him Who 
transcendeth time, Who by His bonds freeth first-formed Adam from the bonds 
of time, and bindeth him to Himself with the bonds of His sweet love. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
As thou wast wholly beautiful and didst become close to the King of all, О 
Theotokos, with good works fill me who have lived in wickedness and 
slothfulness, and have come to the end of my life, that I may glorify thee 
throughout all ages. (Twice) 
As of old Thou didst most gloriously deliver the prophet from the belly of the 
whale, О Word of God, deliver also my soul, which hath stumbled headlong into 
the abyss of destruction, О Savior, having the Virgin, who gave Thee birth 
without knowing wedlock, praying to Thee. 
Those who do evil, finding me clothed in the beautiful raiment of divine birth, 
have stripped me of it, О Theotokos; but by repentance do thou array me in 
divine vesture by thy supplications, О Virgin. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Unto her who was prefigured on Sinai in the bush and the flame * 
before Moses the lawgiver, * she who conceived the fire of God within her 
womb without being consumed, * the most radiant and inextinguishable 
lamp, * the very Theotokos, thee do we honor and magnify with hymns. 
That Thou mightest find the coin which Thou hadst lost, О good Christ, 
Thou didst set Thy flesh afire on the Cross; making Thy heavenly hosts partakers 
of Thy joy, О Bestower of life, with them we hymn Thee as our Benefactor, 
magnifying Thee in song. 
As Thou didst lift up Thy hands upon the Cross, О Christ, with Thy power 
Thy didst strengthen my hands, which before were weakened by many passions; 
fortifying my truly weak knees to run the divine race: Wherefore, I glorify Thee. 
To the martyrs: Burning with flame, through countless wounds Thy steadfast 
and wondrous spiritual athletes found Thee to be a dew of coolness; wherefore, 
rejoicing, they trod the path with desire for honors, unceasingly magnifying thee 
with hymns. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
To the martyrs: The multitude of spiritual athletes, the choir of the saints, 
entreat Thee, О Christ, on behalf of the assembly of those who have greatly 
offended Thee. In the multitude of Thy mercy, О Compassionate One, cleanse us 
of the multitude of our iniquities, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
Theotokion: О Virgin, thou hast given birth to the Effulgence of the Father, 
Who beareth the guise of mortals. When the sun beheld Him lifted up upon the 
Cross, it dimmed its rays, unable to bear the sight, but the gloom of the madness 
of idolatry faded. Wherefore, with it we magnify thee. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern 
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to 
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not 
known a man. 
O incorrupt and immaculate Virgin, disdain me not who am corrupt of mind 
and depraved of soul and conscience, who am defiled by evil and appear stripped 
bare of all good deeds; but do thou adorn me with works of piety. 
I have been filled with evils, filled with thoughts which alienate me from Thee 
the Lover of mankind; wherefore, I groan and cry aloud: Accept me, the penitent, 
and by the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee, reject me not, О greatly 
merciful Benefactor. 
That I may be delivered by thy prayers from all wrath, the deadly passions, 
cruel Gehenna and fire, from unjust men and wicked enemies, О all-immaculate 
maiden, I have fled to thy protection and call upon thee for help. 
In that thou art the Mother of God, beseech the Lord God and King, that I, 
thy servant, who from my mother’s womb have set my hope on thee, may be 
delivered from every threat and wicked habit, О Lady. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone III: 
Coveting bliss, I was banished, suffering a great fall; yet Thou didst not despise 
me, О Master: for, assuming what is mine for my sake, Thou wast crucified and 
saved me, leading me into glory. О my Redeemer, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
On the mountain, lifting up his arms in the form of the Cross, Moses 
vanquished Amalek; and Thou, О Savior, stretched out upon the precious Cross, 
embraced me, saving me from slavery to the enemy, and didst give it to me as the 
sign of life, enabling me to escape the arrows of mine adversaries. Wherefore, О 
Word, I bow down before Thy precious Cross. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Having fought the good fight, even after death ye shine in the 
world like beacons, О holy martyrs; wherefore, possessed of boldness, entreat 
Christ to have mercy on our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee hanging upon the Tree, О mine supremely 
good Christ, the all-immaculate one cried out, lamenting maternally: “O my most 
beloved Son, how hath the iniquitous council condemned Thee to the Tree?” 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON WEDNESDA Y MORNING: TONE III 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III: 
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy 
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who 
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom! 
Thou wast crucified and pierced in the side for my sake, О my Jesus, Who 
pourest forth upon me a twofold stream of salvation; wherefore, saved by Thy 
suffering, О Christ, I hymn and glorify Thy loving-kindness. In Thy kingdom, 
remember me who cry out aloud. 
Reckoned among the iniquitous, О Jesus, Thou didst take away the iniquities 
of us all; and crowned with thorns as the King of all, Thou dost cut off the thorns 
of the sin of our forefather at the root; wherefore, we now glorify Thy suffering 
with faith. 
To the martyrs: О valiant spiritual athletes, all-glorious martyrs, who emulated 
the sufferings of Christ and with divine power cast down the deception of the 
enemy: Ye have received heavenly glory, О saints, praying for us all. 
Glory ..., О Unity of three Hypostases, indivisible and all-accomplishing 
Trinity, single Essence and Power: From all the harm wrought by the enemy 
protect those who hymn Thee, and grant us Thy kingdom, which those who live 
virtuously receive. 
Both now ..., Beholding on the Cross Him Who took flesh of thy pure blood, 
О maiden Birthgiver of God, thou didst cry out, weeping: “How hath the wicked 
assembly rewarded Thee, slaying Thee, the life and resurrection of all the 
faithful?” 
On Wednesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon, the hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
