--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE III 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of holy apostles, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy martyrs, О Christ ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Through the supplications of Thine honored and divine apostles, О only 
Merciful and Compassionate Lover of mankind, grant Thy humility to Thy 
servants, and save from misfortunes those who hymn and worship Thee with 
faith. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
When with the Judge of all ye shall sit on twelve thrones to judge all creation, 
show me not to be condemned, but deliver me from darkness and all affliction, О 
divine apostles, my benefactors. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
As ye were eyewitnesses to God, deliver me from the arrows of the ungodly 
one, foiling his machinations; and bedew me with the dew of the Spirit, I pray 
you, О divine apostles, my wise benefactors. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Wretch that I am, I have been wounded by the sting of the serpent and lie 
downcast, dead, bereft of breath. But by thy vigilant supplications do thou quickly 
raise me up, О all-blessed hierarch, that I may glorify thy speedily attentive grace. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Seeing me lying before him, my mind darkened by evil thoughts, he of 
deceitful mind in nowise ceaseth his pursuit of me; but, in that Thou art God, 
have pity and save me, by the prayers of Nicholas. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
О most blessed Nicholas, thou hast been revealed as great salvation for all of 
us, for thou deliverest thy servants from all manner of misfortunes and perils, 
from temptations, infirmities and evil circumstances, and from the invisible foe. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Great is the power of thy wonders, О pure one! For thou dost deliver from 
misfortune, save from death, rescue from unexpected perils, release from 
tribulations, and wipe away the offenses of all mankind. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
Your sound went forth into all the earth, О holy apostles, destroying the 
deception of the idols, and preaching the knowledge of God. Behold, your 
struggle is good, О blessed ones; wherefore, we hymn and glorify your memory. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
As branches of the life-bearing Vine, О glorious apostles, ye brought 
yourselves to God as the fruit of piety; wherefore, as ye have boldness before 
Him, ask that He grant peace and great mercy to our souls. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Rendered steadfast by faith, strengthened by hope, and 
spiritually united by the love of Thy Cross, О Lord, Thy martyrs abolished the 
tyranny of the enemy; and having received crowns, with the incorporeal ones they 
pray for our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O maiden, I have sinned exceedingly, do thou rescue me from the flame of 
want by thy great supplications, and set me aright O pure one by thine entreaties, 
and guide me to the paths of salvation by thy maternal supplications.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE III 
AT COMPLINE  
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
О Theotokos, grant me contrition and spiritual tears, that I may weep for my 
many transgressions and my failure to correct my conscience. О maiden, I entreat 
thy loving-kindness. 
Stumbling over my thoughts, I fall headlong into the abyss of destruction. О 
Virgin, I now entreat thy help: set thou unshakably the weakness of my mind 
upon the firm rock of the commandments of God. 
Glory ..., I bear the barrenness of the fig tree, and fear felling and disputation, 
lest my Creator and God send me into the fire. О Lady, anticipating my needs, 
render me fruitful in works of repentance, that I may glorify thee. 
Both now. ..., I beseech thee, О most pure one who art full of grace, in that 
thou art the immaculate temple of the King, with chastity and a pure life cleanse 
thou my heart, which hath been defiled by unseemly passions, and enrich it with 
grace. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
Many are they who war against me and afflict me, and I can find no ease of 
deliverance from those who beset me; yet disdain not my prayer, О pure one. 
Weighed down by a multitude of evils and my manifold transgressions, I am 
unable to lift up mine eyes to the heights of heaven; yet do thou grant me 
remission, О most pure one. 
Glory ..., All my days the evil serpent strives to destroy my lowly soul; yet do 
thou break his soul-destroying fangs, О Theotokos. 
Both now ..., О Theotokos, deliver me from all the misfortunes which beset 
me, thy servant, and from tempests of sin, and by thy supplications direct me to 
the haven of salvation. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
I tremble, considering the depths of my sins and the grievous and great billows 
of mine adverse thoughts; yet do thou direct and pilot me to the calm haven, О 
most pure one. 
Grievous ignorance, incomprehension and the heedlessness of mine evils have 
now come upon my soul; yet do thou, О most pure one, lead me to repentance 
for those things which I have done. 
Glory ..., With streams of tears extinguish the fire of the passions and with the 
fire of the Spirit bum up the thorns and billows of life which choke my mind, О 
Birthgiver of God, for thou art my protection and boast. 
Both now ..., I am wholly engulfed by the tumult and threefold billows of 
perils and evil thoughts, and ever dragged down into the abyss of despair, I cry to 
thee: О Lady, save me, thy servant! 
ODE V 
Irmos: In a vision Isaiah saw upon a throne, * God lifted up on high * 
borne aloft by angels of glory; * and he cried: ‘Woe is me! * For I have 
foreseen God made flesh, * the Lord of the never-setting light * and the 
King of peace.’ 
Thou knowest the pain of my soul, the weakness of my flesh and the 
corruption and inconstancy of my mind, О Lady. Wherefore, grant me thy mercy 
and grace, that, saved by thy protection, I may glorify thee. 
Deny me not thy loving-kindness and compassion, О all-immaculate Lady; but 
grant thy mercies, and the release and forgiveness of mine evil deeds to me who 
approach thee in compunction, that I may hymn thy mighty acts with 
thanksgiving. 
Glory ..., Those who hate me in vain and oppress me have now increased in 
number more than the hairs of my head, О pure Virgin, seeking to destroy me and 
make of me food for them to devour; wherefore, turn them back, filling them 
with shame. 
Both now ..., О pure Virgin who hast given peace to the world and salvation 
unto all, having given birth to divine Peace, with the peace and love of Christ the 
Savior quell thou the battle of the passions against my soul and body. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 
There is no one on earth who lives as wickedly as I do in deed, word and 
action. Wherefore, О Lady, I beg thee to grant me the mercies of thy love for 
mankind. 
Actions of evil transgression beget grief for all; wherefore, we are now beset by 
bitter perils. Help us, О thou who alone art the salvation of Christians! 
Glory ..., Thou hast given birth, yet hast remained pure after birthgiving, О 
Virgin Theotokos; wherefore, do thou ever entreat thine Offspring, that we, thy 
servants, may be delivered from all the harm of the enemy. 
Both now ..., Through the supplications of Thy most pure Mother, of all the 
prophets, martyrs and sacred disciples, О Word of God, grant us peace and the 
cleansing of transgressions. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
I have passed my whole life in great slothfulness, О most pure one, and have 
now drawn nigh unto my departure from this time; and I am afraid of mine 
enemies, lest they destroy my soul, О all-immaculate one, and cast me into the 
abyss of destruction. Yet take pity on thy servant, О Virgin, and deliver me from 
their affliction. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the 
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us 
who cry to Thee, * ‘Blessed art Thou, the God of our fathers!’ 
Defiled in body and soul, and sullied by mine unclean acts, I beseech thee, the 
pure and immaculate Mother of God, О Lady, trusting in thy mercy: Have pity on 
me, О most pure one! 
The multitude of my transgressions and temptation of evils fill me greatly with 
perplexity and drag me down into the abyss of despondency; but do thou, О most 
pure Lady, save me who am perishing and cruelly drowning. 
Glory ..., In the magnitude of the compassions of thy goodness, О good One, 
overlook the multitude of our sins, and be thou well disposed toward those who 
cry out unceasingly: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God of our fathers! 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now.... О pure and blessed one, from the mire of the passions and the 
depths of sorrows and the perils of life do thou draw toward dispassion and 
gladsome joy us who cry: Thou alone art full of the grace of God! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The flame of material fire withered * through the immaterial flame 
brought about by the god-seeing children, * wherefore they chanted: * 
Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
The bitterness of pleasures, overcoming all the senses of my body, doth foully 
sully my soul, drawing me toward death. О Sovereign Lady of the world, be thou 
my salvation! 
To thee have I entrusted soul, heart and body, for I have no other help than 
thee, О Lady, through whom I obtain mercy; wherefore, grant me thy rich mercy 
and grace. 
Glory ..., Poisoning me with his venom, the serpent hath grievously slain my 
wretched soul with bodily death; yet bring it to life again, using thy supplications 
as remedies to counter the adversary. 
Both now ..., О thou who hast given birth to God the Savior, the Prince of 
peace, beseech Him, that He quickly bestow peace upon the world, that we may 
glorify Him in peace. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: We magnify thee, the unburnt bush, * the holy Virgin, * and the 
Mother of the Light, * the Theotokos, the hope of us all.  
Wash away the defilement of passionate thought from my mind, О pure one, 
clothing me in the splendid robe of dispassion. 
Open unto me the divine portals of repentance, О Virgin, terminating and 
hindering my passions and pleasures. 
Glory ..., Hearken unto the voice of my groaning, the voice of my lamentation, 
and grant cleansing and salvation to my wretched soul, О all-immaculate Virgin. 
Both now ..., Verily and in truth Daniel the prophet beheld thine Offspring, О 
Virgin, and he called Him Who sitteth on the throne the Ancient of days. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT MATINS  
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone III:  
Come ye all, and let us praise the apostles as helmsmen; for they abolished the 
delusion of the idols, led us up to the light of life, and taught us to believe in the 
Trinity. Wherefore, celebrating their honored memory today, О ye faithful, we 
glorify Christ our God. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the end of the world. 
In that Thou art almighty, О Lord, Thou didst make brilliant the memorial of 
Thine apostles, for Thou didst strengthen them to emulate Thy sufferings, and 
they manfully vanquished the power of the enemy; wherefore, they have received 
the grace of healing. By their prayers grant peace to Thy people, О Lover of 
mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Theotokos, thou didst mystically contain within thy womb the 
Unapproachable and Uncircumscribable One, Who is of the same essence as the 
beginningless Father; and we who glorify thine Offspring in the world have come 
to understand the Godhead of the Trinity to be single and uncommingled. 
Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry out to thee: Rejoice, О joyous one! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
Ye irrigated all the earth with streams of the divine Word, О apostles, and 
grew the grain of faith, and filled the ends of the whole world therewith; for ye cut 
down all the tares. Wherefore, ye brought all to Christ God, baptizing them for 
the uncreated Trinity. 
Verse: The heavens * shall confess Thy wonders, O Lord. 
Ye irrigated all the earth with streams ...,  
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: О holy passion-bearers, entreat the merciful God, that He 
grant our souls remission of transgressions. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The prophets preached, the apostles taught, * the martyrs confessed, and we 
believe, * that thou art truly the Theotokos; ** wherefore, we glorify thine 
ineffable birthgiving.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
In that Thou art full of loving-kindness, О Christ, Thou didst launch Thine 
apostles toward the ends of the earth like arrows keenly sharpened, to slay all 
ungodliness and evil vanity, and to plant the doctrines of salvation. At their 
supplications, О Compassionate One, grant peace to our souls. 
Praising thee, the preacher of the Truth and most radiant beacon of the world, 
О Nicholas, we chant and cry aloud, praying with faith: As thou didst rescue the 
innocent from death, О holy one, so deliver us also from misfortunes, tribulations 
and all grievous affliction. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
As thou hast maternal boldness before thy Son, О all-immaculate Lady, 
enliven my soul, which hath been slain by many offenses; for thou alone hast 
given birth, in a manner transcending understanding and comprehension, to the 
Word, Who with the Father and the Spirit is without beginning, and Who ever 
granteth life, incorruption and great mercy to the world. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy, glorious and all-famed apostles, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone III: 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Come, let us bless the sacred apostles; the pillars of the Church, the 
foundations of the Faith, the bulwarks of piety who make steadfast all the faithful 
that we may be saved by their entreaties. (Twice) 
Terrified, I, the prodigal, condemn myself even before the judgment, for I 
have amassed” countless evil deeds; wherefore, I pray Thee, О righteous Judge: 
Through the divine entreaties of Thine apostles save me, who am desperate. 
О steadfast pillars of piety, set me aright who am ensnared by the deception of 
the enemy, for I lie upon the ground in affliction, and know not what to do to 
find remission for those things in which I have sinned. 
Theotokion: With the holy prophets, the apostles and martyrs, О pure one, 
earnestly entreat the Lord Who became incarnate of thee, that He mortify all our 
carnal passions and grant us life everlasting. 
Another canon, of the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone III: 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Irmos: Let us sing to the Lord, who hath wrought marvelous wonders * in 
the Red Sea: * for in the deep waters He hath drowned our enemies * and 
saved Israel. * To Him alone let us sing, for He is glorified. 
Let all of us, who are ever engulfed by the waves of life, honor and lovingly 
bless Nicholas, the most radiant and inextinguishable beacon, the tower on earth, 
who beckons us to the divine harbor. 
Strengthened by the power of God, О all-blessed one, in mind thou didst 
acquire zeal for piety; wherefore, thou didst deliver those who were to be unjustly 
put to death. We therefore beseech thee: Deliver us from all unjust affliction, О 
Nicholas! 
Thou didst offer supplications to the Lord in abundance, О father, that He 
deliver us from sins and the flame of everlasting torment, from perils and 
tribulations, in that He is good. 
Theotokion: Together let us hymn the most pure Mary, the divine ark 
containing the Giver of the law Who, in the in effable depths of His divine tender 
compassion, taketh away all our iniquities. 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
О eye-witnesses of Christ, ye who have filled the ends of the earth with divine 
doctrine, fill my soul with virtuous works and good thoughts. (Twice) 
Deliver me, О disciples of Christ, from the many temptations of the wicked 
one, from all manner of tribulation, from all oppression and every evil 
circumstance. 
Alas, О my wretched and lowly soul! Sinning often and angering God, how 
canst thou ask forgiveness for thy wickedness, since thou dost not cease doing it? 
Theotokion: О divine ladder which Jacob beheld, whereby God descended, 
lifting us up: Earnestly pray with the apostles, that He have pity on us. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O barren and infertile soul, * bring forth a crop of glorious fruit and 
joyously cry aloud: * I have been firmly established by Thee O God; * there 
is none holy and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thou wast shown to be a sharpened sword of the Spirit, О wise father 
Nicholas, cutting down the evil tares of the heretics, and smoothing the saving 
paths of the virtues for the faithful. 
Unto thee do we beseech, the wellspring pouring forth torrents of healings, О 
holy one: By thy supplications wash us clean of the defilement of all the passions, 
delivering us from misfortunes and tribulations. 
Laying the enemy low by thy mighty prayer, О father Nicholas, through the 
invocation of thy holy prayers strengthen now our thoughts therein, for they are 
weakened by the assaults of the passions. 
Theotokion: The mind cannot comprehend the birth of thy wondrous 
Offspring, which passeth understanding, О all-immaculate Birthgiver of God; 
wherefore, I pray to thee: Ever grant my mind grace, that I may glorify thee. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
Extending the word to the ends of the world, as lightning-bolts and rays of the 
never-setting Sun, О apostles, ye enlightened all, dispelling the gloom of 
ungodliness. (Twice) 
The sea of grievous sin overwhelms me, and the waves of unseemly thoughts 
batter my lowly soul. О Lord my Helmsman, save me by the supplications of Thy 
disciples! 
I am filled with horror, contemplating Thy dread coming, О Master, for I have 
within me my conscience condemning me even before the trial, and my lack of 
sense, before the tormenting tortures,  
Theotokion: О Word of God Who wast born from the divine Virgin maiden, 
by her mediations and those of Thine apostles, deliver our souls from every evil 
circumstances and all want, О Savior. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine 
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come forth 
from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely 
overshadowed. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Every one of the faithful ever setteth thee forth as a mediator before God, О 
Nicholas; wherefore, we beseech thee: Deliver us from grievous perils and falls 
into sin, О father. 
As thou dost possess the grace of the Lord, О wise one, ever pour living water 
upon the hearts of those oppressed by the burning heat of tribulations and the 
aridity of sins, and who should perish wretchedly, О all-blessed one. 
О all-blessed one, who once delivered those led forth unjustly to execution, 
save us now from the oppression of corrupting men, and from all the deception 
of the demons. 
Theotokion: In an excess of compassion thou hast ineffably given birth to the 
incarnate Word. Him do thou beseech, О most pure one, that He deliver all from 
the carnal passions and defilement, and from all the needs of life. 
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The Invisible One hath appeared on earth, * and the 
Unapproachable One hath willingly dwelt among mankind; * and, rising 
early at dawn, we hymn Thee, * O Lover of mankind.  
Incarnate on earth, Thou didst make the disciples heavens declaring Thy glory, 
О Christ. Wherefore, for their sake, О Lord, have mercy on our souls. (Twice) 
Deliver Thy servants from the passions and all need, and from grievous 
circumstances, О Word, through the right acceptable supplications of Thine 
apostles. 
Woe is me, О my passion-wracked soul! How shalt thou, who art fruitless, 
stand before the dread tribunal? Make haste and repent, producing the fruits of 
the virtues! 
Theotokion: Ever entreat as thy Son Him Who ineffably appeared on earth in 
the flesh through thy pure blood, О pure one, that He grant us cleansing. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: By Thine unwaning light, O Christ, * do Thou illumine my humble 
soul * and guide it in Thy fear * for Thy commandments are light. 
Standing before the pure Light and ever illumined with the rays emitted 
thereby, О father, ask that we obtain cleansing and peace. 
О supremely good One, by the fervent prayers of Nicholas have pity on me 
who have angered Thee more than all others by mine insensitive mind. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
I who have wasted my life in despondency pray to thee, О father Nicholas: 
Raise my defiled mind up to repentance. 
Theotokion: As thou alone art the joy of the angels, О divinely joyous one, fill 
with joy my downcast mind, which is wallowing in slothfulness. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have surrounded me, * and my spirit 
perisheth, * but do Thou, O Master, stretch forth Thy lofty arm * and like 
Peter O Helmsman, * do Thou save me. 
Pouring forth an abyss of spiritual wisdom, the company of the apostles dried 
up the stench of worldly mindedness, giving drink to the assemblies of the pious. 
(Twice) 
Sigh and shed tears, О my lowly soul, and cry out to the Lord, saying: I have 
sinned against Thee, О Master! Cleanse me, О Compassionate One, by the 
entreaties of Thine most wise apostles! 
Torrents of the passions have gushed forth and engulfed the house of my 
soul. But as ye are rivers of the Spirit, О apostles, restore me to life, who have 
been demolished, 
Theotokion: With her who gave Thee birth, О Christ, the council of the 
apostles entreats Thee to send down cleansing and peace upon Thy servants, in 
that Thou art the easily reconciled God and Lover of mankind. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The abyss of the passions and a storm of adverse winds * have risen 
up against me. * But do Thou make haste, O Savior, * to save me, and 
deliver me from corruption, * as Thou didst deliver the prophet from the 
sea-monster. 
Having mortified thy members by abstinence, thou didst acquire the life which 
waxeth not old, wherein do thou cause us to share by thy supplications, О wise 
one, through the avoidance of wicked sin. 
With the mast and sails of thy sacred prayers, deliver us from the deep of 
many and varied perils and the abyss of sin, О wise and holy hierarch, steering us 
to the harbor of life. 
Adorning the cathedra of Myra in Lycia thou wast shown to be the beauty of 
high priests. О holy hierarch, by thy supplication save us unharmed by the perils 
of the world! 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: In the loving-kindness of His mercy, the only God, the Word 
Who dwelt within thy womb, О pure Mother, dispelled the corruption which 
from of old dwelt within us. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Of old the three children did not worship the golden image, * of the 
Persian idol, * but chanted in the midst of the furnace: * O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Christ, the Light of the world, showed you, О light-bearing apostles, to be the 
light which dispelleth the darkness of delusion, enlightening the thoughts of the 
faithful. (Twice) 
О divinely eloquent apostles, break ye the snares which the enemy hath laid 
for us, and make smooth the paths of repentance for us who have recourse unto 
you. 
As divine salt cleanse my soul, which hath been made foolish by the carnal 
passions, О divinely eloquent disciples of the Lord, imparting to it life through 
faith. 
Theotokion: Enlighten me with goodly ideas, I beseech thee, О beauty of 
Jacob, praying now with the apostles unto Him Who was born of thy pure blood. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: * 
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: * 
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
As a true chief shepherd, О father Nicholas, with the cords of thy words thou 
didst strangle the mindless Arius, who of old was leading the people of the Lord 
to destruction. 
Having passed thine most holy life in holiness, О father Nicholas, thou 
dwellest with the saints, sending sanctification and enlightenment upon those who 
piously call thee blessed. 
О father Nicholas, we ever invoke thee as a ready deliverer and a fervent 
helper: Deliver us from the passions and the unexpected perils which beset us! 
Theotokion: О pure one who hast given birth to the Light: Enlighten me who 
have darkened by soul through negligence, lighting the lamp of my heart, that I 
may glorify thee with goodly diligence. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: United together in the unbearable fire, * yet not harmed by the 
flame, * the children, champions of godliness, sang a divine hymn: * O all 
ye works of the Lord, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
I have been wounded by the sword of the passions, and have injured my heart 
in mindlessness, the accomplisher of evil. Heal me, who am wholly at a loss, О 
glorious apostles, for ye are the physicians of men’s souls and bodies. (Twice) 
The divine sound of the preachers went forth into all the earth, teaching all to 
worship throughout the ages, the single Essence, the one Being of the Holy 
Trinity, the one true Dominion, the one Kingship. 
О Master, О Word Who knowest mine infirmity, slothfulness and evil-
mindedness, convert me, who have sinned greatly and have wasted Thy divine 
long-suffering by remaining in my transgressions. 
Theotokion: О most pure Theotokos, thou divine tongs which ineffably 
received the divine Coal: Quench the burning embers of my passions with the 
dew of thy prayers and those of the most glorious and divine apostles. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: God is unceasingly glorified on high by the angels, * O ye heaven of 
heavens, * ye earth and mountains, ye plains and abysses, * and all the race 
of mankind, * with hymns as to the Creator and Redeemer, * bless ye, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
As thou wast meek, О venerable one, thou didst inherit the land of the meek; 
wherefore, I pray to thee with faith: By thy supplications still thou the threefold 
waves of the evil one, which ever batter me. 
As thou didst deliver the military commanders who were unjustly condemned 
to die, so deliver us from the oppression of wicked men and from every assault of 
the demons, praying to the Savior, О Nicholas. 
Thou didst show us the straight path of salvation, О Nicholas. Guide us 
thereto who in this life traverse it by thy prayers, that together we may enter the 
gates of life. 
Theotokion: He Who was born from thee is my strength and my song, О 
most pure Virgin. Him do thou earnestly beseech, that He strengthen me who am 
weakened by the passions, that I may keep His saving commandments. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: In the shadow and the letter of the Law, * let us, the faithful, discern 
a figure: * every male child that openeth the womb * shall be sanctified to 
God. * Therefore we magnify the firstborn Word * and Son of the 
beginningless Father, * the firstborn Child of a Mother who hath not 
known a man. 
О Word of the beginningless Father, Who by the words of Thy disciples didst 
confirm the ends of the earth: By their supplications have pity on me who have 
fallen headlong into irrational passions and am overwhelmed by the delusion of 
the demons. (Twice) 
О my soul who panders to the onslaughts of the passions, offer supplication 
unto Him Who suffered for thy sake, that He may deliver thee from grievous 
circumstances, for the sacred disciples plainly pray for thee, having emulated the 
sufferings of His flesh. 
О disciples of Christ, when ye sit with Him to judge the fate of the innocent, 
keep my soul from condemnation, though it hath been defiled by unseemly deeds, 
for ye are my good intercessors and the helpers of the world. 
Theotokion: О pure Virgin, most pure Virgin, palace of Christ, most holy 
Virgin, who beyond cause and all telling hast given birth to God, the Holiest of 
the holy: With the holy apostles pray for us all. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who didst 
conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet remained 
unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the hand of man, 
* and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed forth * from the 
root of David. 
The world hath acquired thee as a divine bulwark and foundation, and a 
goodly refuge, for by thy mediations we are ever delivered from every temptation 
and oppression, О father Nicholas. Wherefore, in praise we bless thee with faith. 
Beset by many evil circumstances, I flee to the broad expanse of thy fervent 
prayers, О all-blessed one. Cause the pain of my soul to cease, I cry to thee; still 
thou the waves of despair, and calm the turmoil of my mind. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
The Creator cometh to judge all the earth, and as one unprepared, wretch that 
I am, I am utterly terrified, considering the multitude of mine evils. О long-
suffering Lord, have pity and save me through the divine prayers of Thy venerable 
Nicholas! 
Theotokion: О thou who hast given birth to the Light, thou hast been revealed 
to be mine enlightenment, dispelling the dark and cruel clouds of my soul, that by 
thy prayers I may become a child of the day, doing holy deeds, that in holiness I 
may bless thee in hymnody. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone III: 
Your sound went forth into all the earth, О holy apostles, destroying the 
delusion of the idols, preaching the knowledge of God. Behold, your struggle is 
good, О blessed ones; wherefore, we hymn and glorify your memory. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Having blamelessly kept the commandments of Christ, О holy apostles, ye 
freely received and freely give, healing the sufferings of our souls and bodies; 
wherefore, as ye possess boldness, entreat Him, that our souls may find mercy. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God. be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Having fought the good fight, even after death ye shine forth 
like beacons in the world, О holy martyrs. As ye have boldness, entreat Christ, 
that our souls may find mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Without seed thou didst conceive by the Holy Spirit; we glorify thee and sing 
thy praises: Rejoice, O most holy Virgin! 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III: 
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy 
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who 
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom! 
О apostles, who with the Cross as a fishing-pole didst drag men forth from the 
depths of ignorance, ye drove heathen deception from the earth and were verily 
true saviors of the faithful; wherefore, ye are blessed. 
As mystic rays and lights of the Sun of righteousness, О glorious apostles, ye 
dispelled the darkness of ungodliness and guided all to the light of the knowledge 
of God; wherefore, we honor you. 
To the martyrs: Ye endured torture by burning, О spiritual athletes, and 
received from on high the dew of grace; and as favorites of Christ, О wise ones, 
ye ever piously heal the sufferings of all; wherefore, we honor you with faith, О 
saints. 
Glory ..., О sacred preachers of the Trinity: Peter and Paul, Mark and Luke, 
Matthew, Simon, James, Andrew and John, Thomas, Bartholomew and the wise 
Philip: entreat God, that we may be delivered from every evil circumstance. 
Both now ..., О Lady, full of the grace of God, beauty of the apostles and joy 
of the holy passion-bearers: Entreat God the Savior on behalf of us all, that we 
may find remission of transgressions, and may all come to share in life divine. 
 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
