--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING: TONE III  
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy martyrs, О Christ ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Having endured wounds, fetters and divers tortures, suffering mightily, the 
valiant martyrs were brought to their divine inheritance which is truly devoid of 
pain, the heritage of their pangs. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
О holy hierarchs of the Lord, who piously uttered divine discourse, and 
thereby set at naught all the arguments of the heretics, showing yourselves to be 
exceedingly sure paragons for all the faithful; wherefore ye are honored. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
While in your material bodies, ye emulated the ranks of the immaterial and 
incorporeal beings, О God-bearing fathers, most gloriously exhibiting their 
manner of life; wherefore, ye dwell in their habitations. 
Then these other Stichera, of the holy martyrs, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Great is the power of Thy Cross, О Lord! For though it was planted in one 
place, it worketh throughout the whole world, making apostles of fishermen and 
martyrs of the heathen, that they might pray for our souls. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Great is the power of Thy martyrs, О Christ; for while lying in their graves 
they drive evil spirits away; and, having struggled for piety with their faith in the 
Trinity, they abolished the authority of the enemy. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
The prophets, the apostles of Christ and the martyrs enlightened and taught 
the erring nations to hymn the consubstantial Trinity, and made the children of 
mankind companions of the angels. 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion:  
How can we, O all-honored one, * not marvel at thine Offspring? * Who is 
both God and man. * For without knowing a man, O all-immaculate one, * 
without a father thou hast given birth to a Son in the flesh, * who without a 
mother was begotten from the Father before all ages, * yet in no way undergoing 
change, fusion or separation, * but preserving fully the characteristics of both 
natures. * Wherefore, O Lady, and Virgin Mother, * beseech Him to save the 
souls of those ** who with Orthodox faith confess thee to be the true Theotokos.  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise up 
against me redeem me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone III: 
To the martyrs: Made steadfast by faith, strengthened by hope, and spiritually 
united by the love of Thy Cross, О Lord, Thy martyrs put an end to the tyranny 
of the enemy and have received crowns; and with the incorporeal ones they pray 
on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
For the reposed: All things human, which endure not after death, are vain. Our 
wealth will not remain, our glory will not go with us upon the way: for when death 
cometh, all these things will fade away. Wherefore let us cry out to Christ the 
immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who rejoice have 
their abode with Thee. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: O race of mankind, why are ye rebellious in vain? Short is the 
course on which we run. Life is but smoke, vapor, ashes and dust; No sooner 
doth it appear, than it quickly vanisheth. Wherefore let us cry unto Christ the 
immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who rejoice have 
their abode with Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
 
O Theotokos - holy among women, * thou Mother unwedded: * entreat the 
King and God Whom thou didst bear, * that He save us, ** insofar as He is the 
Lover of mankind.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
FRIDAY NIGHT: TONE III 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: He who of old gathered the waters * into one by His divine decree, 
* divided the sea for the people of Israel. * For He is our God and 
supremely glorious, * to Him alone let us sing, for He hath been glorified. 
Having given birth to the Author of salvation and Bestower of life, in a 
manner transcending understanding, О pure Birthgiver of God, thou hast thereby 
loosed the bonds of the condemnation of Eve our first mother; wherefore, all 
creation doth call thee blessed. 
From the depths of despair do thou rescue me who am afflicted by cruel 
pangs in soul and body, О most holy Virgin, delivering me from all want; for thou 
art the wellspring of loving-kindness, О most pure one. 
Glory ..., I have cast off the vesture of gladness, falling into sorrow and pain, 
and have been cruelly wounded in every place. But go thou before me and deliver 
me from the falsehood which assails me, for thou art my refuge and hope, О 
Lady. 
Both now ..., Having acquired thee as a steadfast intercessor, О Bride of God, 
I flee to thy protection, praying: Spurn not thy servant, who am weighed down by 
many passions, pangs and sorrows, but heal me by thy prayers, О Mother of God. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
Wretch that I am, I find myself in painful perplexity and sorrow, beholding 
death following close upon me; wherefore, О most pure one, save me by thy 
supplications. 
All my life, which hath become corrupt through evil and prodigal works, doth 
accuse me and plungeth me into despair. О pure one, save me! 
Glory ..., The abyss of thy compassions, О Lady, poured forth everywhere 
solely because of thy goodness, doth anoint with rich oil all who ever hymn thee. 
Both now ..., Thy Son and Lord, receiving thee as from the origin of our 
nature, О Bride of God, joineth those who hymn thee by thy prayers. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 
All my hope have I placed in thee, О Lady. I pray and fall down before thee 
with all my soul: Deliver me from deadly sickness, and lead me up to the life of 
salvation, О thou who hast given birth to our Life. 
By thy supplications, О pure one, heal me, thy servant who have become 
desperate because of grievous and corrupt wounds; for thou hast given birth to 
the Physician, our God Who is rich in mercy. 
Glory ..., By thy divine enlightenment deliver me who have fallen into cruel 
passions and grant me a vesture of gladness, О Virgin who hast caused the Joy 
which passeth all understanding to blossom forth. 
Both now ..., Thou hast been revealed to be another heaven, О pure 
Theotokos, who hast ineffably shone forth the Sun of righteousness on earth, by 
Whom the everlasting light of divine knowledge hath shone forth. 
ODE V 
Irmos: I rise at dawn unto Thee, * the Creator of all, * surpassing all 
worldly understanding; * for Thy commandments are light, * wherein do 
Thou guide me. 
Because of my boundless sins I have drawn nigh unto the passions, bringing 
about death. О Mother of God, I earnestly beseech thee to become my 
deliverance from many evils. 
I stretch forth the hands of my soul unto thee, О pure one, for, wretch that I 
am, I have been enfeebled by carnal deeds. Yet do thou deliver me from many 
wounds, imparting healing unto me. 
Glory ..., I have cast off the garments of health and in pain have clothed 
myself in a robe of tears. To thee I pray, О Lady: Clothe me again in health! 
Both now ..., In that thou art the sacred majesty of the martyrs and apostles 
and the help of the faithful, О Theotokos, we all glorify thee as is meet. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Lead me up from corruption, О Lord my God! * cried Jonah unto 
Thee; * and I also cry aloud to Thee: * Deliver me from the abyss of my 
many evils, О Savior, * and guide me I pray, to Thy light! 

--- PAGE 5 ---
A multitude of pangs hath assailed me because of my boundless offenses, 
corrupt as I am, and clothed me in mortality; yet do thou, О Theotokos, deliver 
me from them and rescue me from all want. 
I have been cast into the abyss of transgressions, pangs and boundless 
sorrows, and I can in nowise deliver myself from them; yet, stretching forth thy 
hand, О Birthgiver of God, lead me up to salvation. 
Glory ..., We know thee to be a steadfast foundation and a mighty help for 
those in sorrow, О Theotokos; wherefore, having fled to thy protection, I beseech 
thee: Deliver me from grievous misfortunes and from cruel pangs. 
Both now ..., Let us hymn the divine ark, the Virgin Mother of God, the 
furrow which hath put forth the divine Grain whereby the hearts of the faithful 
are fed with faith and spiritual famine is brought to an end. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone III: 
Without separating Himself from the divine Essence, and becoming incarnate 
within thy womb, God became a man yet remained God, the one Lord, preserving 
thee, the Virgin Mother, as immaculate after giving birth as thou wast before 
birthgiving. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He grant us great mercy. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the 
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us 
who cry to Thee, * ‘Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!’ 
Take pity on me, О Virgin Bride of God, for I have stumbled headlong into 
the depths of despair. I entreat thee to be tranquility for me, О most pure one, for 
thou art ever a haven of salvation for those in need. 
Ineffably, in a manner transcending understanding, thou hast given birth to 
Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God; wherefore, as thou art mighty in mercy 
and compassionate, grant me thy saving healing, О Theotokos, thou hope of the 
faithful. 
Glory ..., Having enriched the ends of the earth and granting the sweetness of 
incorruption by thy divine birthgiving, free me from corrupting sickness and the 
bitter passions, О most glorious Mother of God. 
Both now ..., Setting thee forth as the mystical door to Himself and the 
wondrous helper of those on earth, О pure one, through thee, He hath given to 
mankind a portal leading all to eternal life, in that He is compassionate and the 
God of all. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace burnt not the children, * neither did the fire 
of the Godhead consume the Virgin, * wherefore with the faithful children 
we cry aloud: * 'Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord'. 
Having accumulated an unfathomable abyss оf transgressions, I am now 
drowning, engulfed in sickness, О pure one. Wherefore, stretching forth to me a 
helping hand, I pray thee; lead me up from the abyss of pain. 
О pure Ever-virgin, all-hymned Theotokos, thou hast been revealed to be the 
earthly throne of God and the portal of heaven; wherefore, open unto me the 
door of salvation, O Mother of God, and free me from the darkness: of the 
passions. 
Glory ..., Like a vine thou didst produce the uncultivated Grape, exuding the 
wine which maketh glad the souls of those who hymn Him with faith, О pure and 
all-immaculate one. 
Both now ..., Remaining incorrupt after giving birth, О all-immaculate and 
pure one we pray: Deliver from corruption thy servants, who faithfully chant with 
oneness of soul: Bless the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him, 
throughout the ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who didst 
conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet remained 
unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the hand of man, 
* and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed forth * from the 
root of David. 
О good Virgin, thou joy and refuge of the world! protection of the faithful and 
deliverance from sorrows! Do thou stand before me at the hour of my death, and 
deliver me from the demons who seek to destroy me. 
In that thou didst conceive the Creator and God within thy womb, О pure 
Virgin Mother, by the power which is in thee cast down the arrogance of the 
demons and lift up the horn of those who hymn thy divine might and venerate 
thine image with faith. 
Glory ..., He Who became incarnate from thee, О pure Virgin, restoring our 
nature, hath made new and renewed through thy maternal supplications, those 
who in hymns unceasingly magnify thee, our radiant and vigilant ally, the 
Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Thou art the joy of the angels, the beauty of the righteous; thou 
art the hope of the faithful and our preservation. Thou art the bridge, which 
conveyeth to the life which groweth not old, those who magnify thee with faith 
and love. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone III:  
Your goodly endurance, O all-praised passion-bearers, vanquished the wiles of 
the enemy, the author of all evil; wherefore ye were deemed worthy of eternal 
blessedness. Intercede, then with the Lord, that He save the flock of Christ-loving 
people, in that ye are witnesses to the Truth. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Through your faith ye shine like most radiant beacons, O physicians of the 
infirm, and all-famed passion-bearers. Ye were undaunted by the torments of the 
torturers, and cast down the ungodliness of idolatry, having the true Cross as an 
invincible trophy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Theotokion: We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * O 
Virgin Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the Cross 
in the flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from corruption, ** in 
that He is the Lover of mankind.  
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
Arraying yourselves in the full armor of Christ, and wielding the sword of 
faith, as martyrs ye hewed down hordes of the enemy; for, in hope of life, ye 
earnestly endured all the threats and wounds of the tyrants of old. Wherefore, ye 
have received crowns, О stouthearted martyrs of Christ. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
О holy passion-bearers, entreat the merciful God, that He grant unto our 
souls, the remission of sins. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. * Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
For the reposed: When at Thy word we stand before Thine impartial tribunal, 
О Lord our Savior, put not to shame those who believe on Thee; for we have all 
sinned and fallen away from Thee. Wherefore, we beseech Thee: In the mansions 
of Thy righteous, grant rest to those whom Thou hast taken from among us, for 
Thou alone art sinless, О Christ. 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The prophets preached, the apostles taught, the martyrs confessed, and we 
believe, that thou art truly the Theotokos; wherefore, we magnify thine ineffable 
birthgiving.  
Canon of the holy martyrs, hierarchs, the venerable and the departed, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone III: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Wondrous art Thou, O God, * Who gloriously workest wonders, * 
Who didst fashion the earth from the abyss, * and didst cover the chariots 
and saved the people who sang to Thee * as our King and God. 
Ye found the glory of martyrdom, О most wise spiritual athletes and passion-
bearers, and bravely endured many and varied tortures; wherefore, ye are ever 
glorified. 
Tending the flock of the Lord well with divine power, ye were revealed to 
possess a most exalted manner of life, О divine ministers, most wise initiates of 
the mysteries of the incarnate Word. 
Having crucified yourselves to the world, ye rejected all carnal passions, О 
venerable ones, and, revealed to be vessels of the Spirit, by divine power ye 
destroyed the spirits of delusion. 
For the reposed: Granting endless life and never-waning light unto those who 
with pious faith have passed from the earth at Thy command, О Compassionate 
One, grant rest unto them, in that Thou art good. 
Theotokion: With the honored women who shone forth in fasting and cast 
down the enemy by their sufferings, do we with pious demeanor honor thee, О 
most pure one, as her who gave birth unto God in the flesh. 
Another canon, of the departed, which we chant when there is no Menaion, the 
composition of Theophanes, in Tone III: 
Irmos: Having clearly made the form of a Cross with the staff, * and 
thereby prepared a path, * Israel of old crossed the turbulent sea as though 
on dry land, * Wherefore, let us chant in praise to our wondrous God, * for 
He hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
О Christ Who by Thy burial didst slay death and cast down the tyranny of 
Hades, ascending into the heavens as our forerunner, with Thyself Thou didst 
raise up the choir of the passion-bearers. Grant rest now unto the souls of those 
who have passed over to Thee. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
О Savior, Who hast strengthened the divine martyrs and by them annulled the 
power of delusion: By their supplications be Thou well-pleased to grant those who 
have reposed in Thee, immortality and a goodly inheritance. 
Glory ..., When Thou wast slain, Thou didst pour forth Thy blood for Thy 
servants, in that Thou art compassionate, О Master, paying their ransom; 
wherefore, we beseech Thee, О Thou Who art full of loving-kindness, grant rest 
unto Thy servants who have passed over to Thee. 
Theotokion: Let us hymn the pure Theotokos, who gave birth unto God Who 
by His own death hath overthrown our death, and poured forth life which waxeth 
not old, and abiding blessedness. 
ODE III 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: O barren and infertile soul, * bring forth a crop of glorious fruit and 
joyously cry aloud: * I have been firmly established by Thee O God; * there 
is none holy and none more righteous than Thee, O Lord. 
Strengthened by the power of God, О glorious martyrs, ye utterly destroyed 
the pernicious power of the enemy who is mighty in evil, and ye have received 
divine crowns of victory. 
О Christ our Master, Who revealed the venerable as victors over the enemy, 
and didst consecrate the holy hierarchs with Thy most holy anointing: By their 
supplications sanctify and enlighten those who hymn Thee. 
With all the prophets we praise the choir of the godly women who shone forth 
in fasting and suffered with faith, trampling down the greatly crafty enemy. 
For the reposed: Those whom Thou hast taken from among us by Thy divine 
will, О compassionate Christ, do Thou number with the saints through the 
prayers of Thy holy ones, overlooking the transgressions they committed in this 
life. 
Theotokion: We who have been saved by thy holy birthgiving cry out to thee 
with faith the salutation of Gabriel, “Rejoice!”; and we pray: In thy prayers ask 
forgiveness for us all. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: O Most High, Ruler of all, * who out of nothing hath established all 
things, * fashioned by Thy Word, * perfected by the Spirit, * confirm me in 
Thy love. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О Thou Who didst fashion me from earth and hast most splendidly restored 
me, a wretch returning to the earth, grant rest to the souls оf the departed through 
the prayers of the martyrs. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Entreated by the beatings and bonds, and stripes and wounds of the passion-
bearing martyrs, О Compassionate One, number the souls of Thy servants in the 
habitations of the saints 
Glory ..., From Gehenna, fire and the abodes of gloom do Thou deliver Thy 
servants who have reposed in faith and hope, О Master and Lover of mankind. 
Theotokion: О most sacred and most pure Theotokos, thou art the Mother of 
the Creator Who destroyed the power of death and hath given us incorruption. 
ODE IV 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Habakkuk foresaw the overshadowed mountain, * even thine 
immaculate womb, O pure one. * Wherefore he cried; God shall come forth 
from Thaeman, * and the Holy One from a mountain * densely 
overshadowed. 
Slaughtered willingly like lambs, О wise spiritual athletes, ye brought 
yourselves like sheep to the Lamb, the Word of God, Who on the tree of the 
Cross was well-pleased to be slain for the race of mankind. 
With the venerable let us honor the right glorious chief hierarchs, who were 
lamps unto the faithful; for they dispelled the profound darkness of heresy and 
the passions, and with faith have passed over to the never-waning Light. 
With the beauty of their words the divinely eloquent prophets enlighten the 
souls of the faithful; and with the splendors of their struggles and the dawning of 
their miracles the God-bearing women illumine their hearts. 
For the reposed: Those who have departed this life do Thou reveal to be 
sharers in heavenly glory, О good Word of God, granting them deliverance from 
the transgressions they committed on earth in knowledge and in ignorance. 
Theotokion: Let us hymn the all-hymned Mother of the Lord, the glory of the 
martyrs, the divine adornment of holy hierarchs and the venerable, the 
confirmation of the faithful, and the proclamation of the prophets. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Thou hast shown us steadfast love, O Lord, * for Thou gavest Thine 
only-begotten Son over to death for our sake. * Wherefore with 
thanksgiving we cry unto Thee, * ‘Glory to Thy power, O Lord!’ 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Mercifully making Thine abode in the tomb for our sake, О Master, as God 
Thou didst empty the graves; and having revealed the martyrs to be triumphant, 
grant that Thy departed servants may dwell in a place of ease. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
О Master Who rejoicing, accepted the mighty feats of the spiritual athletes, the 
wounds and dismemberments they endured for Thee: Deliver from torment those 
whom Thou hast taken to Thyself. 
Glory ..., О Thou Who holdest the balance of life in Thy hand, grant Thine 
endless life and incorrupt glory unto those who have passed on to Thee, breaking 
down the middle wall of partition. 
Theotokion: Thou wast truly shown to be true Mother and Virgin, О all-
immaculate one, uniting a true conception and birthgiving to virginity; for thou 
hast given birth unto God Who hath broken the power of death. 
ODE V 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: By Thine unwaning light, O Christ, * do Thou illumine my humble 
soul * and guide it in Thy fear * for Thy commandments are light. 
Your stripes and wounds inflicted incurable wounds upon the enemy, but they 
now heal the wounds of all the faithful, О spiritual athletes of the Lord. 
Let us hymn the multitude of the venerable, let us bless the holy hierarchs of 
Christ, and let us honor His prophets, who ever pray now on our behalf. 
Loving God Who became incarnate for our sake, the most glorious women, 
who with upright character suffered and fasted, abide now in the heavens. 
For the reposed: Amid the sustenance of paradise, in the land of the living, 
where Thy light shineth, О Christ, settle Thy faithful servants, whom Thou hast 
taken from the earth. 
Theotokion: God became incarnate from thee, О most pure one, and hath 
now shown thee to be more exalted than the angels and higher than all creation; 
wherefore, we hymn thee, О Lady. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: I rise at dawn unto Thee, * the Creator of all, * surpassing all 
worldly understanding; * for Thy commandments are light, * wherein do 
Thou guide me. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
For the sake of the martyrs and by the supplications of the honorable spiritual 
athletes, О good One, Who art the Firstborn of the Church, number those who 
have departed from us with the righteous. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
As deliverance from many transgressions Thou didst shed Thy most holy 
blood, О Christ; and now, by the supplications of Thy martyrs, О Savior, grant 
rest to those who have reposed in piety. 
Glory ..., Unto the eternal place of Thy delights which pass understanding, О 
Word, guide the souls of the departed, and deem them worthy of the divine 
splendors of the saints. 
Theotokion: As is meet, we bless thee, the Virgin who in a manner past all 
telling conceived in her womb the infinite Word Who giveth life unto the dead. 
ODE VI 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: О Lover of mankind, disdain not those * who have reached the end 
of the ages * and are assailed with destruction by the threefold billows of 
perils, * yet cry aloud: О Savior, save us, * as Thou didst save the prophet 
from the sea monster! 
Let the luminaries of the honored Church, the most sacred and all-glorious 
spiritual athletes of Christ, the Lamb and Shepherd, be honored with sacred 
hymns. 
The assembly of the venerable, who exalted God in humility, hath been 
exalted, and the multitude of the holy hierarchs hath been glorified in good works, 
glorifying the Holy Trinity. 
Full of courageous valor, the choir of sacred women hath wounded the 
iniquitous foe by showing forth divine miracles and by their perfect endurance of 
pangs. 
For the reposed: Those whom Thou hast taken from the earth in the faith, do 
Thou enroll in the councils of the saints and number in the bosom of the faithful 
Abraham, О Christ, that they may ever glorify Thy great loving-kindness. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, thou art the boast of the martyrs, the prophets 
and the venerable, and the righteous of ages past; wherefore, with them we honor 
thee with joyful voices, О Theotokos. 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Lead me up from corruption, О Lord my God! * cried Jonah unto 
Thee; * and I also cry aloud to Thee: * Deliver me from the abyss of my 
many evils, О Savior, * and guide me I pray, to Thy light! 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Through the supplications of the passion-bearers, О Christ, transform into joy 
the lamentation of those who have reposed in the Faith, magnificently girding 
them about with gladness, and guiding and directing them to Thy light. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
In the multitude of Thy compassions, О Christ God, grant rest to the departed 
in the bosom of the patriarchs, where the radiant light of Thy countenance shines; 
and overlook all their transgressions. 
Glory ..., О Christ, show forth as wondrous, the marvelous mercy of Thy love 
for mankind, upon those who have departed from here and are delivered from the 
cruelties of life; and fill them, with joy and meekness. 
Theotokion: We have been delivered from mortality, corruption and death by 
thy most glorious birthgiving, О Mother of God; for unto us thou didst give birth 
to the Source of incorruption, illumining the whole world with thy light. 
ODE VII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: The three children in the furnace, prefiguring the Trinity: * 
trampled underfoot the threat of the fire * and cried aloud, chanting: * 
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
Standing in the midst of the fire, О most glorious passion-bearers of the Lord, 
ye received divine dew from heaven; and slain by tortures, ye rendered the greatly 
crafty foe dead. 
О divine and holy hierarchs, as helmsmen of the ship of the Church of Christ 
ye kept it from foundering, truly escaping the evil waves оf deception. 
О true ascetics who mortified the flesh with sacred struggles, ye have inherited 
the life of dispassion, which waxeth not old, chanting; Blessed art Thou, О Lord 
God of our fathers. 
For the reposed: Show not Thy faithful servants, whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself, to be deserving of condemnation, О Word, but grant them rest in the 
radiance of Thy saints, that they may hymn Thy loving-kindness. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, thou art truly the glory of the martyrs and 
the venerable, the prophets and the holy women, and all the hierarchs who 
received sacred ordination; and with them we honor thee. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: As of old Thou didst bedew * the three pious children in the 
Chaldean flames, * so also with the radiant fire of Thy divinity * illumine us 
who cry to Thee, * ‘Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!’ 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
О Word of God, Who for all art the life-creating Cause and creative Power: 
Grant unto the souls of Thy departed servants the sustenance promised to the 
martyrs. Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
The glorious martyrs valiantly ignored their bodies as things corruptible, О 
Christ; and they now pray to Thee with boldness: Grant rest to the souls of Thy 
departed servants. О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Glory ..., With the Cross as a pen, for all the faithful Thou didst sign a writ of 
emancipation from sins. Grant now that the souls thou hast taken to Thyself may 
also share therein, and in gladness sing to Thee: О God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou! 
Theotokion: The Word of the Father, Who hath wrought all things by His 
will, as God hath restored human nature, which was buried by the passions. 
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О most pure one! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: God is unceasingly glorified on high by the angels, * O ye heaven of 
heavens, * ye earth and mountains, ye plains and abysses, * and all the race 
of mankind, * with hymns as to the Creator and Redeemer, * bless ye, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Sorely beset by the endurance of wounds and the infliction of pangs, ye did 
not deny the true Life, О passion-bearers of the Lord, nor did ye offer worship to 
graven images, a wicked delusion. 
О lamps of the honored virtues, set upon lamp-stands, ye illumine the souls of 
all, dispelling all darkness, О passion-bearers who work sacred deeds, who dwell 
with the celestial intelligences. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Let the right laudable prophets, the company of the righteous and the right 
glorious multitude of all the reverent women, who pray to God the Savior on our 
behalf, be hymned as is meet 
For the reposed: О Thou Who hast dominion over the living, the faithful 
whom Thou hast taken from the earth do Thou settle with the saints in the light 
of Thy countenance, О Savior, granting them forgiveness of transgressions in Thy 
great loving-kindness. 
Theotokion: As is meet, let the greatly hymned Virgin, the proclamation of the 
prophets, the adornment of holy hierarchs, passion-bearers and the venerable, and 
the joy of holy women, be hymned throughout the ages. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Serving the living God in Babylon, * the children who took no 
pleasure in the sounding of the musical instruments, * patiently stood 
within the flames, * and sang a divine hymn saying: * 'Bless ye the Lord, all 
ye works of the Lord'. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
As the treasury of immortality, О Bestower of life, to the dead Thou didst 
proclaim incorruption, which Thou didst give to Thy martyrs, who with piety and 
faith chant unto Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
With spiritual wisdom and the endurance of tortures the mighty spiritual 
athletes paid no heed to their torments, and they entreat Christ to grant remission 
unto departed souls, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Glory ..., Cleanse those who have departed unto Thee, О Good Savior, Who 
by the spear which pierced Thy side hast torn apart the record of sins and 
removed the middle wall of their transgressions; and be Thou well-pleased that, 
receiving it, they may chant unto Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Theotokion: О pure Virgin, we know thee to be a noetic cloud for those 
burdened by the thirst of mortality, pouring forth the water of remission, 
imparting immortality unto all the dead, who ever cry out with faith: Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ODE IX 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Upon Mount Sinai Moses saw thee in the bush, * as one who didst 
conceive the fire of the Godhead within thy womb, * and yet remained 
unconsumed. * Daniel saw thee as a mountain not cut by the hand of man, 
* and Isaiah proclaimed thee as the Rod that blossomed forth * from the 
root of David. 
Ye brought yourselves like lambs to Him Who was slain for our sake, and 
filled the divine choirs of the angels with joy, О passion-bearers of Christ; 
wherefore, by your prayers make all steadfast and deliver them from the harmful 
delusion of the enemy. 
Possessed of the Word of life, like lamps ye enlightened men’s souls, О most 
sacred hierarchs of Christ who share in divine glory; for, having received the fire 
of the Spirit, О venerable ones, ye utterly consumed the passions and abolished 
the immolation of idolatrous sacrifices. 
Let us honor the holy prophets and the multitude of the venerable, who in 
their pure life shone forth before the law and under the law; and let us praise the 
choirs of holy women, and cry aloud: By their prayers, О Lord, save us all! 
For the reposed: Thy burial and resurrection became life for all; wherefore, 
with boldness we cry out to Thee: Grant rest with all the elect unto the faithful 
whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, forgiving them all their offenses, in that Thou 
art the supremely good God. 
Theotokion: “Awesome is this place!” Jacob cried aloud when he beheld thee 
depicted in the true ladder, О Theotokos, thou glory of the martyrs, boast of the 
venerable, adornment of the angels and all the prophets, and salvation of the 
faithful. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Unto her who was prefigured on Sinai in the bush and the flame * 
before Moses the lawgiver, * she who conceived the fire of God within her 
womb without being consumed, * the most radiant and inextinguishable 
lamp, * the very Theotokos, thee do we honor and magnify with hymns. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
As the only good God and Lover of mankind, by the supplications of the 
martyrs grant that those who have passed over to Thee may dwell now in the land 
of the meek, granting them remission of sins, that we may unceasingly magnify 
Thee with hymns. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
О Christ, among Thy holy ones number those whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself in the dwellings of the saints, in the bosom of Abraham, where the 
ineffable and divine light of Thy countenance shines, and everlasting joy truly 
abides forever. 
Glory ..., In a place of verdure, by restful waters, grant Thy blessed life, the 
unceasing sustenance of eternal good things, and true gladness, unto Thy servants, 
whom of Thy will Thou hast taken to Thy self, О Bestower of life. 
Theotokion: Like the holy ark and the tabernacle of witness didst thou, О all-
immaculate one, receive within thy womb God thy Creator, the Giver of the law, 
Who by His death hath annulled the law of death. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
On the Praises, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone III: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the martyrs: Come, all ye peoples, let us honor the memory of the holy 
passion-bearers. For, having become a spectacle to angels and to men, they have 
received crowns of victory from Christ God, and they ever intercede on behalf of 
our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
The warriors of Christ cast aside the fear of kings and tyrants; and with 
courage boldly confessed Him as the Lord and God of all, our God; and now they 
intercede on behalf of our souls.  
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
The hosts of the bodiless angels marveled at the sufferings of the martyrs; For 
though clad in mortal flesh, they paid no heed to their tortures, following the 
example of Christ the Savior's Passion; and they ever interceding on behalf of our 
souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
For the reposed: O race of mankind, why are ye rebellious in vain? Short is the 
course on which we run. Life is but smoke, vapor, ashes and dust; No sooner 
doth it appear, than it quickly vanisheth. Wherefore let us cry unto Christ the 
immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who rejoice have 
their abode with Thee. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Without seed thou didst conceive by the Holy Spirit; we glorify thee and hymn 
thy praises: Rejoice, O most holy Virgin! 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the departed, in Tone III:  
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross, О Christ ...”: 
I glorify Thy precious Cross O Lord, whereby life and blessedness have been 
granted to those who with faith and love hymn Thy praises, O greatly merciful 
One. Wherefore we cry aloud unto Thee, O Christ God: Grant rest to our 
departed brethren, where all who rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
Repeat: I glorify Thy precious Cross O Lord .., 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
О Christ God Who alone art merciful and compassionate, Who hast an 
unapproachable abyss of goodness, Who knowest human nature, which Thou 
didst create, we beseech Thee: Unto those who have been taken from us grant rest 
where all who rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
Verse: Their memorial * is from generation to generation. 
When Thou didst rest in the tomb as a man, as God Thou didst raise up with 
invincible power, those who were sleeping in the graves, and who offer Thee 
unceasing hymnody. Wherefore, we beseech Thee, О Christ God: Unto those 
who have been taken from among us grant rest where all who rejoice have their 
abode with Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Theotokos, all of us know thee to be the noetic lamp bearing the Light of 
the Godhead, Who had united Himself to the coarseness of human nature. 
Entreat thy Son and God, that unto those who have been taken from among us 
He grant rest where all who rejoice have jubilation. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE III 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone III: 
Thou didst banish from paradise our forefather Adam, who had broken Thy 
commandment, О Christ; but Thou didst cause to dwell therein the thief who 
confessed Thee on the cross, crying: Remember me, О Savior, in Thy kingdom! 
Subjected to wounding by fire, О passion-bearers of Christ, ye found the dew 
of heaven which cooled and strengthened you to endure the bitter pangs in your 
flesh; wherefore, ye ever ease all the pain of our souls. 
The holy and sacred hierarchs, the glorious apostles, the multitude of the 
venerable, the council of godly women who faithfully suffered, and set at naught 
the deception of the enemy, have received heavenly glory. By their supplications, 
О Savior, have pity on Thy servants. 
For the reposed: О Jesus our God and Savior, in the abodes of Thine elect 
number those who have departed from us in faith where Thy light shineth, and 
the sustenance is everlasting, and overlook their offenses, that we may fervently 
glorify Thee, О Master. 
Glory ..., О ye faithful, let us worship the uncreated Trinity in three 
Hypostases but a single Godhead: the Father, the Son and the divine Spirit: Who 
is ever glorified with faith by the incorporeal hosts in three sacred ranks. 
Both now ..., The Redeemer, enlightenment and cleansing of all revealed 
Himself through thee, О divinely joyous and most pure Lady. Him do thou 
earnestly entreat, that at the dread judgment He deliver from all condemnation us 
who ever hymn Him with faith. 
 
On Saturday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, * O ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
And for the Departed, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
Another, for the departed: 
Communion Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to 
Thyself, O Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
  
