--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE IV 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness, 
I have sinned against Thee, О Lover of mankind, and not according to my 
human nature, for which I might ask forgiveness, but inhumanly, past my nature, 
beyond forgiveness. О my Savior Who didst become a man, transcending the laws 
of nature and comprehension by the human mind, since Thou hast a love for 
mankind surpassing understanding, have mercy on me that I may turn back to 
Thee. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Thou didst appoint repentance for those who sin, and not for the righteous, О 
Christ. I have as examples the thief and the prodigal, Manasseh and the harlot, the 
persecutor Paul, the publican and Peter who fell away, yet I am brought sorely to 
despair. Knowing Thy supremely good love for mankind, О Savior, I turn to Thee 
and weep, filled with the good hope that Thou wilt accept me. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Unto me who am now sunk in the passions of the body and am far removed 
from Thee, О King and God of all, grant compunction, the removal of evils and 
perfect amendment. In Thy great goodness, О omnipotent Jesus, Savior of our 
souls, save me, a prodigal, who otherwise have no hope. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy, incorporeal angels, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Thou didst establish the angelic armies as pleasing habitations and most 
honored receptacles of divine light, О Immortal One; setting them in godly ranks 
as beholders and ministers of Thy glory, to carry out Thy word and fulfill Thine 
all-accomplishing and most holy will. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Desiring as God to reveal an abyss of goodness, О Thou Who art without 
beginning, Thou didst first create the angelic choirs and the ranks of the hosts by 
Thine almighty hand and divine command; for it was truly fitting that goodness be 
poured out and go forth, that it might be given unto many, О Master. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
The six-winged seraphim, the many-eyed cherubim and the exceedingly 
exalted thrones, the dominions, the principalities, authorities, archangels, angels 
and divine powers surround Thee, partaking directly of Thine all-accomplishing 
radiance, praising Thy glory, О Almighty; praying to Thee on our behalf. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O all-immaculate one, who hast surpassed the ranks of angels: With the angels 
ever beseech Him Who hath dominion over the angels and all of creation, that He 
grant us remission of sins, deliverance from the passions, and make us, who hymn 
His glory, worthy inheritors of incorrupt sustenance. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 
our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone IV: 
I desired to erase the record of my transgressions with tears, and to please 
Thee well by repentance for the rest of my life; but the enemy deceiveth me and 
wageth war on my soul. Before I utterly perish, О Lord, save me! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Who is tempest-tossed, yet fleeth to Thy haven, О Lord, and is not saved? 
Who is sick and, falling down before Thy healing power, is not cured? О Lord, 
Creator of all and Physician of the infirm: Before I utterly perish, save me! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О Christ God, Who art glorified in the memorials of Thy 
saints, be Thou entreated by them, and send down upon us great mercy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O cloud of Light! * Rejoice, radiant candlestick! * Rejoice, jar wherein 
the Manna was kept! * Rejoice, staff of Aaron! * Rejoice, bush un-burnt! * Rejoice, 
bridal-chamber! * Rejoice, thou throne! * Rejoice, holy mountain! * Rejoice, 
refuge! Rejoice, divine table! * Rejoice, mystic portal! ** Rejoice, thou joy of all!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
SUNDAY NIGHT: TONE IV  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, 
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the 
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
Accept the supplication of my soul, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to 
God in the flesh; for I have fled unto thy mighty assistance, lest my hope utterly 
fail. 
Like a slave I fall down before thee, О most pure Birthgiver of God, for, as 
thou hast great boldness, by thy supplications mediating before thy Son, deliver 
me from all tribulations. 
Glory ..., Engulfed by the waves of the sea of life and beset by cruel 
temptations, I have hastened to the calm haven of thy protection; wherefore, 
deliver me from evils, О Theotokos. 
Both now ..., With thy compassionate and calm gaze look upon thy servant 
and make haste to hearken unto me, О good one, fulfilling the supplication of thy 
servant and destroying the counsels of the evil, О most pure one. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O 
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
О Lady, thou art an aide for the faithful against the enemy, an ally in battles, 
and a refuge for those who grieve. 
In that He is thy Son, pray to the God of all, to Whom thou hast given birth in 
the flesh, that throughout all circumstances of life He grant me remission of mine 
evils. 
Glory ..., Mercifully regard our lowliness, О Lady, that thy servants may be 
delivered from the wrath which ever besets us. 
Both now ..., Ever saved from all sorrows by thy protections, О good Lady, 
we offer praise to thy Son. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
As thou hast boldness before thy Son, О pure Birthgiver of God, free me 
from this present temptation, setting at naught the constant machinations of the 
enemy who ever wages war upon me. 
О ye choirs of the ranks on high, ye martyrs and apostles, ye assembly of the 
divine prophets, ye righteous and venerable: with the Mother and Theotokos pray 
to Christ on our behalf. 
Glory ..., О Christ, accept Thy most glorious Mother who prayeth for the 
world and mercifully crieth out to Thee: “O my Son, accept my supplication and 
calm the wrath which hangeth over the world!” 
Both now ..., I fall down before thee, О Theotokos, and pray from the depths 
of my heart: Rescue me from these present trials, that, delivered from evils, I may 
offer hymnody to thy splendor. 
ODE V 
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise 
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of 
Thy Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
О pure one, thou hope and help of mortals, take pity on our lowliness, we 
pray, and free us from this present wrath. 
Availing ourselves of thy prayer as it were an insuperable rampart, О pure one, 
we cry out to thee: О Lady, drive away the invisible foe! 
Glory ..., Let us who put our trust in thee never be put to shame, О most pure 
one, we pray with tears, rendering homage to thy goodness. 
Both now ..., With thy most pure hand drive away the enemy who warreth 
against us, О all-hymned one; and let the accursed ones understand that we have 
placed our hope in thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * prophet Jonah praying in the 
belly of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O 
Jesus Thou King of hosts. 
Wash away our sins, we pray, О Lover of mankind, by the supplications of her 
who gave birth to Thee without seed; for, for our sake О Word, Thou didst shed 
Thy precious blood. 
Against us hath a wicked assembly of those who unjustly war against us 
gathered together, O Bride of God; but cast them down, like Peter cast down 
Simon Magus of old. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Hearken unto our prayer, О Lady, we pray, and still thou the waves 
of the tempest of divers pangs whereby enemies have assembled against us. 
Both now ..., Transform my grief into joy, in that Thou art compassionate, 
replace my lamentation with gladness, and have pity, О Christ Who, for the sake 
of the Theotokos, transformed water into wine in Cana of Galilee. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Darkened in mind by many transgressions, I, the prodigal, cry out to thy 
mighty aid, O Theotokos: Enlighten the eyes of my soul, shine upon me a radiant 
beam of repentance, and clothe me in the armor of light, O pure Virgin Birthgiver 
of God.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Forsake us not to the end for Thy names sake, * for we have not 
forsaken Thy commandments, * and take not Thy mercy from us * O Lord 
God of our Fathers, * who art supremely hymned throughout the ages. 
Amid divers perils and tribulations, I have now fled to thee, my salvation, О 
pure one, and I cry aloud: Let me not be turned away, ashamed, from my hope, 
but hearken, and deliver me from the snares of those who pursue me. 
Like a slave I bend my neck, wretch that I am, and I utter a cry from the 
depths of my heart; stretching forth my hands, I bend my knees and entreat thee, 
the most pure Virgin, that I be delivered from the tribulations of those who ever 
assail me with the assaults of the evil one. 
Glory ..., О most glorious and pure Mary, boast of mortals, we pray: Grant 
thine aid unto us who pray and piously worship thine Offspring, for we have 
acquired none other hope or helper than thee. 
Both now ..., О Mary who knewest not a man, О helper of the faithful, who 
hast given birth to God in a manner transcending understanding and all nature, 
from sudden temptations deliver as pure those who honor thee, unharmed by all 
enemies, visible and invisible. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
I dare not raise my hands unto thy Son, О pure one, for I am wholly defiled; 
wherefore, in boldness I flee to thee, О Lady. Mediate with the compassionate 
God Who is easily placated, that we may be delivered from the adverse foes who 
afflict us. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
To thee have I entrusted mine eyes, heart and soul, О most pure one; 
wherefore, have pity, О pure Lady, falling down before the Compassionate One, 
on behalf of me who am wicked and unable to endure, that He save me from all 
want, wounds and grief. 
Glory ..., “With Thy weaponry fell those who war against us, О Lord, in that 
Thou art mighty, and grant victory unto those who trust in Thee with faith, О 
Master!” prayeth the Theotokos with John the forerunner, the choir of the 
apostles and Thy martyrs. 
Both now ..., Once Gabriel brought thee the joy of the annunciation, О pure 
virgin, and by thy birthgiving hath loosed the grief of our first mother; wherefore, 
having cleansed my soul of despondency, by thy prayers render me unashamed. 
ODE IX. 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Quickly manifest thine aid, О Virgin Theotokos; and eagerly bend thine ear 
and hearkening to us who fervently cry aloud, free us from evils, and deliver us by 
thy prayers. 
Wholly stuck fast in slothfulness, I find myself in an abyss of despair due to 
my transgressions; wherefore, stretch forth thy hand unto me, О Virgin Mother, 
as Christ did to Peter, and deliver me from the depths of sin. 
Glory ..., Lay low the tongue of the ungovernable and haughty one which, like 
a sharpened arrow, aims to slay me, О Virgin; melt it like wax, and show forth his 
counsels to be in vain. 
Both now ..., Destroy all the counsels of those who have armed themselves 
against us, О Mother of God Most High, and fill with joy those who trust in thee, 
that we may all earnestly proclaim thine aid. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our 
Father..., Troparion. The rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE IV 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone IV: 
О Lord, visit Thou my lowly soul, which hath squandered all its whole life in 
sins; accept me as Thou didst the harlot, and save me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Navigating the deep of this present life, I consider the abyss of my many evils; 
and lacking a helmsman for my thoughts, I utter unto Thee the cry of Peter: Save 
me, О Christ! Save me, О God, in that Thou lovest mankind! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou art the invincible rampart of us Christians, * O Virgin Theotokos; * for, 
fleeing to thee, we remain unharmed. * And though we sin again, we have thee as 
our advocate. * Wherefore, in thanksgiving we cry aloud to thee: * Rejoice, O 
thou who art full of grace! ** The Lord is with thee! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV: 
We shall soon enter together into the bridal-chamber of Christ, that we may all 
hear the divine voice of Christ our God. Come, ye who love the glory of heaven, 
and having lit our lamps with faith, with the wise virgins let us receive it. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Condemned by the multitude of my transgressions, I am troubled by fear of 
torment, О Christ God; from the depths of my heart I offer tears of repentance 
unto Thee, Who hast authority over life and death; and in compunction I cry to 
Thee: I have sinned! Save me, О Lord! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Today the armies of heaven have come for the memorial of 
the passion-bearers, to enlighten the minds of the faithful and to illumine the 
whole world with grace. Entreated by them, О God, grant us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Having received the Word in thy womb at the angel’s salutation, and given 
birth to the incarnate God, Christ Emmanuel, О Theotokos, pray thou on behalf 
of our souls. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV: 
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”: 
О supremely blessed Trinity, the choirs of the incorporeal ones unceasingly 
hymn Thee with their immaterial mouths, and standing before Thee with fear, 
they cry out: Holy is the Essence in three Hypostases! By their supplications have 
mercy on the creation of Thy hands, О Thou Lover of mankind. 
The ranks of angels stand with fear before Thy throne, О Master, and ever 
enlightened by the rays thereof, unceasingly chant unto Thee the hymn of victory, 
О Lord. By their sacred prayers grant peace unto the world and the remission of 
our transgressions. 
Glory ..., Both now .., Theotokion: 
O all-immaculate Virgin * who hast given birth to the transcendent God: * do 
thou unceasingly entreat Him with the incorporeal ones, * that He grant 
forgiveness of transgressions * and correction of life before the end, * to us who, 
as is meet, hymn thee with faith and love, ** O thou who alone art all-hymned.  
ODE I 
Canon of repentance, to our Lord Jesus Christ and His holy martyrs, the 
acrostic whereof is “O Savior, save me as Thou didst the harlot of old,” in 
Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the 
mighty strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as 
on a timbrel * I may chant a hymn of victory. 
О Jesus my Savior, Who saved the prodigal, accepted the weeping of the 
harlot, and by Thy goodness justified the publican who sighed: Accept me also, 
who turn to Thee though I have committed innumerable sins, and save me. 
The fire of evil devoureth my soul like tinder, and kindleth the flame which is 
to come. О Long-suffering One and Lover of mankind, extinguish it with the dew 
of Thy mercies, granting us tears of repentance. 
To the martyrs: Full of great understanding, the choir of the holy passion-
bearers, chastely rejecting the foolish counsel and adverse thinking of all the 
violators of the law, received divine honors. 
To the martyrs: О wise and all-famed passion-bearers, who in your faith 
disdained the beautiful things of this world, ye have inherited heavenly life. 
Wherefore, from all the turmoil of the world deliver me, who truly bless you. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: О most pure one, most radiant luminary of the Sun of glory: 
Enkindle the flame of my soul, which hath been extinguished by despondency, 
and ever feed it with the oil of divine works, that I may glorify thee with faith and 
love. 
Another canon, of the holy incorporeal angels, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О angels, who as pure intelligences stand before the great and primal Mind, 
fed by divine radiance: Illumine me with your rays, hymning the Word Who is the 
cause of all, О most glorious ones. (Twice) 
Bowing down before God with love, and manifestly limned by the beauties of 
God, О glorious archangels, ye have taken your place around Him in orderly 
ranks, crying out to the Creator a hymn of victory. 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, who alone received in thy womb the 
Word, Whom the angelic armies ever glorify: Illumine my soul, releasing it from 
dark evil thoughts of sin, and enlightening it with the understanding of thine 
Offspring. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: From on high didst Thou willingly descend to earth, * O Thou Who 
art more exalted than every noetic principality, * and from the uttermost 
depths of Hades * thou didst raise up lowly human nature; * for there is 
none more holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind.  
О Christ God, Who art the never-waning Light, the darkness of the passions 
hath surrounded me with the night of life, but in that Thou lovest mankind, save 
me, enlightening me with rays of repentance, that I may glorify Thee. 
Show me to be an inheritor of the portion of the elect, О Christ my Savior, 
cutting me off from the portions of the adversary, and showing me to be cleansed 
by tears and almsgiving, that in praise I may ever glorify Thee. 
To the martyrs: Truly dyed red by your blood, your feet ran right swiftly to the 
heavens, leaving behind the world of sin, О martyrs, ye co-conversers with the 
divine powers. 
To the martyrs: Subjected to wounding, your bodies were exhausted, О 
spiritual athletes of Christ, but the power of your souls was strengthened, being 
tightly bound by love to Him Who by His will hath created all things. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: О Sovereign Lady Mary, who for all hast given birth to the Lord: 
Enlighten and free me, who am beset by the passions of my mind and am 
darkened by evil. 
Canon of the holy angels  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О Christ Who art hymned by the heavenly choirs: In Thy divine wisdom move 
the assemblies of the faithful to hymn the ranks thereof for there is none more 
holy than Thee, О Lover of mankind. (Twice) 
Sharing in the fervent bonds of love, ye stand as ministers before the primal 
Source, unceasingly hymning the one Essence of the beginningless Godhead, О 
divine archangels, 
Theotokion: О pure Mother who hast given birth unto Christ, thou didst most 
splendidly annul the ancient curse of Eve by the blessings of Him Who crowneth 
all; for there is none as exceedingly holy as thee, our helper. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
I now fall down before thee as Judge, О Lord. Have pity on me, who am 
condemned and in despair; deliver me from Thy just sentence, and grant that I 
may stand with Thine elect. 
О Lover of mankind, heal me, O Christ, for I have fallen among savage 
thieves and been wounded. Pour forth the wine and oil of repentance upon me, 
and clothe me in the vesture of my salvation. 
To the martyrs: When your bodies were flayed, О all-praised martyrs, ye were 
clothed from on high with, the robe of salvation; stripping bare him who of old 
stripped our first father naked, rendering him dead and lifeless. 
To the martyrs: Waxing eloquent before the iniquitous, adorned by piety with 
the understanding of the Word of God, О martyrs, ye put to shame all the 
ungodly sages and rhetors, slaying the enemy. 
Theotokion: Like rain, Jesus the Abyss of wisdom, descended upon thee, О 
Virgin Birthgiver of God, finding thee alone to be pure; thereby restraining the 
grievous torrents of ungodliness with divine grace. 
Canon of the holy angels  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
With unapproachable power Thou didst bring forth the heavenly intelligences 
from non-existence, О transcendent Word of God; and with Thine ineffable glory 
adorned them, who cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, О Christ! 
Guided by the Spirit and His reins, and illumined by divine rays, the heavenly 
hosts formed themselves into unbroken ranks, worshipping the one Godhead, the 
Cause of all. 
Thy ministering radiances were deemed worthy to gaze upon the comely 
beauty of Thy countenance; and, having thereby received understanding, they cry 
out to Thee: Glory to Thy power, О Christ! 
Theotokion: The Virgin Queen now standeth, arrayed in golden vesture, 
before the King her Son, incomparably more exalted than the angels, who cry out: 
Glory to Thy power, О Christ! 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Now I shall arise said God prophetically, * now I shall be glorified, 
now I shall be exalted, * elevating fallen human nature, * which I received 
from the Virgin, * to the noetic light of My divinity.  
О how I shall stand before Thee, the Judge and God of all, condemned and 
accused of all the evils wherein I have mindlessly and willingly sinned, making 
myself wholly unprofitable! 
Save me, О Lord, for I have been filled with many evils; and I pray: Heal my 
sins and grievous sores, and leave me not to perish alone, for I have sinned greatly 
against Thee, О my Jesus. 
To the martyrs: Manifestly finding a blessed end, the spiritual athletes have 
received glory, glorifying Christ the Appointer of the contest, with their bodily 
members, having manfully resolved to suffer wounds and stripes. 
To the martyrs: О blessed spiritual athletes of Christ, by your godly and 
beautiful way of life ye have inherited the riches of heaven, imperishable crowns, 
never-waning light, and a habitation unmade by men’s hands, which waxeth not 
old. 
Theotokion: The voices of the prophets foretold thy wonders, О most pure 
one, calling thee the mountain, the door, and the radiant lamp, from whence the 
wondrous Light truly illumineth the world, О pure one. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
With trembling the cherubim and seraphim, the thrones and the divine 
archangels, the dominions, powers and principalities, the authorities and the 
angels, glorify the one adored Godhead of the Trinity. (Twice) 
The angels were shown to be shining radiantly with light, О Christ, 
proclaiming Thy resurrection to the venerable women in the world, and freeing 
the mind of Thine enemies with the rays of Thy divinity. 
Theotokion: О Thou Who wast ineffably born from the Virgin, delivering 
mankind from corruption, by the regiments of the angels preserve now Thy 
Church, which glorifieth Thee with Orthodox voices. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many 
sins hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O 
Greatly-merciful One. 
As one mortal, I have neither understanding nor sense, wretch that I am, 
possessed of a conscience ever defiled. О God my Creator, let me not utterly 
perish! 
My deeds, like enemies, will accuse me at Thy judgment-seat, О 
Compassionate One; but deliver me quickly from them, О Christ, guiding me to 
repentance. 
To the martyrs: The assembly of the violators of the law broke the bones of 
the passion-bearers, yet were unable to break their faith, for which they have been 
shown to be heirs of God, the Savior of our souls. 
To the martyrs: Like precious stones, the passion-bearers were set upon the 
unshakable rock of hope with divine wisdom; and as temples of the Holy Spirit 
they have made their abode in the temple of God. 
Theotokion: My heart, which hath been darkened by the dark visitations of 
sin, do thou illumine with the light which is within thee, О Bride of God, who 
hast given birth unto Christ the Sun. 
Canon of the holy angels  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Standing round about the Master, and in purity delighting in the effulgence of 
the Source of radiance, О ye angelic armies, enlighten those who hymn you with 
faith. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
О Thou Who in Thy wisdom didst create the angelic choirs, as Master Thou 
didst show forth the dominions, powers and seraphim., who honor Thee with 
praises. 
Theotokion: О Master Christ, Who dost rest upon the most exalted thrones, 
preserving all things by Thy divine providence, Thou didst rest in the arms of the 
Virgin. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant's command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord God of our fathers!  
To whom shall I liken thee, О my wretched soul? Woe is me, for I love 
unseemly things and fail to seek that which is good! Wherefore, hasten thou 
before the end, and exhibit good conduct. 
Grant me a shower of tears, that I may be cleansed of mine evils; and leave me 
not to perish now, who have sinned against Thee more than all others, О Savior. 
To the martyrs: Bearing in your own bodies the mortality of the Word Who 
was slain, ye put deception to death; and having died, О glorious spiritual athletes, 
ye heal those brought to death by the passions, 
To the martyrs: What place doth not now have you as enlighteners and a 
bulwark, О martyrs? What land is not sanctified by your sufferings and the 
dawning of your healings, О glorious ones? 
Theotokion: Thou alone remainest a virgin even after giving birth, О Lady, 
who art resplendent in virginal beauty; thou alone didst escape the pain of 
motherhood: for thou alone hast given birth to God, the Redeemer of our souls. 
Canon of the holy angels  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
With the noetic angels as witnesses to what we have done, О my soul, let us 
choose their pure life, for they cry out: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God of our 
fathers! (Twice) 
Purified by a burning coal, the divine Isaiah beheld the seraphim standing 
before Thy throne, and he cried aloud: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God of our 
fathers! 
Theotokion: As thou hast given birth to the Creator and Lord, О Virgin, thou 
hast been revealed to be more exalted than the ranks of all the incorporeal beings. 
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О pure one! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All 
ye works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Having submitted to the passions, I have been revealed to be like irrational 
dogs О Word of God Who art without beginning, turn me back to Thee and save 
me, who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
The boar hath ravaged and laid waste to me like a solitary vineyard cultivated 
by the Spirit, О Savior. Deliver me from him. О Word, and straightway show me 
to be fruitful for Thee in the virtues. 
To the martyrs: Your bloody skins dyed a divinely woven robe for you, О 
martyrs, and, thereby adorned and wearing crowns of victory, ye stand in the 
highest before the eternal King. 
To the martyrs: The sacred harmony of the martyrs set at naught the unholy 
discord which would have them commit that which is unlawful; and having 
suffered lawfully, they have been lawfully crowned by the Master of all. 
Theotokion: All creation blesseth thy birthgiving, which hath crowned us with 
blessings and removed the curse, О only all-blessed and most glorious one, who 
hath filled our race with grace. 
Canon of the holy angels  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
As the only immortal Life and Creator, Thou didst fashion the angels to share 
in immortal life, teaching them to chant: Bless ye and hymn the Lord! (Twice) 
Noetically standing round about Thee, the archangels chant with never-ceasing 
voices, divinely honoring Thee as the Master of all: Bless ye and hymn the Lord! 
Theotokion: О all-blessed one, the images of the law prefigured thee who hast 
given birth unto God Who is united to fleshly matter, but before was immaterial 
in His divine essence. О Virgin, we bless thy birthgiving! 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the 
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * 
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
This is the time for repentance! Why then are we slothful? Why are we sunk in 
sleep? Let us put away despondency and feed our lamps with the oil of good 
deeds, as it is written, lest we find ourselves standing outside the doors, lamenting. 
While there is yet time to repent, О my soul, turn away from the evils which 
thou hast committed in knowledge and in ignorance, and cry out unto Him Who 
knoweth all things: I have sinned against Thee! Forgive me, О Master, and disdain 
me not, who am unworthy! 
To the martyrs: In places of glory, in resting-places of honor Christ hath with 
exceeding clarity assembled the saints who suffered, from every land and city; and 
they now shine forth in gladness upon the Church of the firstborn. 
To the martyrs: Illumined by the rays of the divine Spirit, the all-precious 
shrines of Thy holy martyrs most gloriously emit the radiance of healings, 
dispelling the pangs of infirmities, О only greatly merciful Lord. 
Theotokion: Enlighten my soul with rays from the light that is within thee, О 
Bride of God, and raise it up, for it lieth in the pit of destruction, defeating the 
enemies who ever assail my heart, and impel it toward the passions. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The ineffable hidden mystery of God hath been revealed in thee, * O 
most pure Virgin; * for in His tender compassion * God become incarnate 
of thee. * Wherefore, we magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Hymning the Mind, the Father and Origin of the Son and the Spirit, and 
having received gifts of divine grace, О angels, be ye assiduously quick to send 
them down upon us. (Twice) 
Beautifully adorned with the gift of incorruption and with grace, hymning 
Thee, the eternal Source of incorruption, О Christ, the divine archangels magnify 
Thee as their Benefactor. 
Theotokion: О Mother of God, we, the faithful, know thee to be the bridal-
chamber and dwelling-place of the ineffable Incarnation, and the ark of the law; 
wherefore, we unceasingly magnify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone IV: 
Wash me with my tears, O Savior, for I am defiled by many sins. Wherefore I 
fall down before Thee crying: ‘I have sinned, have mercy upon me, O God’.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
I am a sheep of Thy rational flock, and to Thee do I flee for refuge, O Good 
Shepherd. I have gone astray, do Thou O God, have mercy on me.  
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Who is not filled with, awe, beholding the good contest wherein ye struggled, 
О holy martyrs? How have ye, who are fleshly beings, vanquished the incorporeal 
foe, confessing Christ and having armed yourselves with His Cross? Wherefore, as 
is meet, ye have been shown to be expellers of the demons and opponents of the 
barbarians, unceasingly praying that our souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Theotokos, Queen of all, * thou praise of the Orthodox: * cast down the 
proud arrogance of the heretics, * and put to shame the countenances of those * 
who neither bow down before nor honor thy precious image, ** O most pure 
one.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE IV 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone IV: 
Of old was Adam banished from paradise through the tree, but by the tree of 
the Cross hath the thief come to dwell in paradise: the one by tasting rejected the 
commandment of the Creator, but the other, crucified with Christ, confessed the 
hidden God, crying aloud: Remember me in Thy kingdom! 
I have sinned more than all others on earth, and I fear the implacable tribunal 
which is to come, О supremely good One. Preserve me uncondemned then, and 
deliver me from torment, granting me repentance which washeth away all 
defilements, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
Standing now before the Master of all, О cherubim and seraphim, ye 
authorities, thrones, archangels, dominions and hosts, ye holy angels and most 
exalted principalities, ask remission offenses and correction of life for all who cry 
out with faith: Remember us in Thy kingdom! 
To the martyrs: Cast into the fire, ye utterly consumed the tinder of deception, 
О all-praised passion-bearers of Christ; and in the multitude of your blood ye 
drowned the serpent of the deep; and having won the victory, ye rejoice with the 
armies on high, praying earnestly that we be saved. 
Glory ..., О Effulgence of the threefold Sun who shinest in the fullness of the 
world, dispelling the cruel passions of my soul: Send down the radiance of light 
and cleansing offenses unto me who now cry out with faith to Thee, the 
beginningless Father, the Son Who is co-enthroned with Him, and the Spirit. О 
Trinity, all-accomplishing Power, save us! 
Both now ..., О pure one, have pity on me who ever sin and am greatly 
hindered by slothfulness, and reveal to me examples of repentance, granting 
compunction to my perplexed soul, О most pure unashamed hope. And 
remember us who hymn thee with love and cry out with: faith, О all-hymned 
Virgin. 
 
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His minis-
ters a flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame 
of fire.  
  
