--- PAGE 1 ---
TUESDAY EVENING: TONE IV  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Lifted up upon the Cross, pierced by a spear, Thy fingers bloodied, О 
supremely good Master, Thou didst sign our emancipation; and tearing apart the 
record of the sins of Adam, our forefather, Thou didst free human nature. 
Wherefore, О Compassionate One, we hymn Thy goodness, which transcendeth 
understanding. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
We hymn Thy sufferings, О Jesus our Master: the Cross, the spear and the 
reed, the sponge and the nails, the beatings, the purple robe and the crown of 
thorns, the spittings and mockery which Thou didst willingly endure. I magnify 
Thy long-suffering, О only Innocent One, Bestower of life, and I glorify Thee 
with faith, О Lover of mankind. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
I bow down before Thy precious Cross, kissing it with love, О supremely 
good One, and I glorify Thy condescension, boundless mercy, ineffable 
compassions and rich goodness, which transcend understanding, for thereby 
Thou hast saved the race of mankind, which was held fast in the darkness of 
transgressions. Glory to Thy crucifixion, О Christ! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
When she beheld Thee nailed to the Cross, О Lord, the Ewe-lamb, Thy 
Mother, marveled and cried out: “What is this that I see, О my most desired Son? 
Thus hast Thou been repaid by the disobedient and iniquitous assembly, which 
enjoyed Thy many miracles. But glory be to Thine ineffable condescension, О 
Master!” 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
When she beheld Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd., upon the Tree, the Ewe-
lamb who gave Thee birth lamented and exclaimed to Thee maternally: “O my 
Son most beloved, how hast Thou been lifted up upon the tree of the Cross, О 
Long-suffering One? How have Thy hands and feet been pierced with nails by the 
iniquitous, О Word? How hast Thou shed Thy blood, О Master?” 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
When she beheld Thee hanging upon the Cross, the Virgin Thy Mother 
marveled, О Lord, and, lifting up her eyes, said: “How have they who enjoyed Thy 
many gifts rewarded Thee, О Master? Yet I pray: Leave me not alone in the world, 
but hasten Thou to arise, raising up our forefather together with Thee!” 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Spec, Mel.: “Called from on high ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: “Lament not for Me, O Mother, * beholding Me thy Son 
and God hanging upon the Tree, * Who hath suspended the earth upon the 
waters unsupported, * and hath fashioned all creation; * for I shall arise and be 
glorified, * and shall crush the kingdoms of Hades with strength; * destroying its 
power * and delivering those in bondage * from its wickedness, * for I am 
compassionate; * and I shall bring them to My Father, ** in that I am the Lover of 
mankind.”  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast given Thy Cross to us as an invincible weapon, О Christ; and with 
it we triumph over the assaults of the alien one. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Ever possessing Thy Cross as a help, О Christ, we easily trample underfoot 
the snares of the enemy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: As ye have boldness before the Savior, О saints, unceasingly 
pray for us sinners, asking remission of transgressions and great mercy for our 
souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: The most pure one, * beholding Christ, the lover of 
mankind, crucified, * His side pierced by a lance, * cried out, lamenting: * “What 
is this, O my Son? * How have these thankless people rewarded Thee * for the 
good things Thou hast done for them? * Dost Thou hasten to leave me childless, 
O most Beloved? ** I marvel, O Compassionate One, at Thy voluntary cruci-
fixion!”  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TUESDAY NIGHT: TONE IV  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Having seedlessly given birth in the flesh to Christ, the immeasurable Wisdom 
and Power of God, О most immaculate Birthgiver of God, through thy 
birthgiving thou hast acquired the might of strength and divine majesty. 
О thy birthgiving which passeth understanding, О most pure one, whereby the 
multitude of mortals have been enriched with incorruption and, as is meet, now 
call thee, the blessed Mediatress of restoration! 
Glory ..., By thine overshadowing heal thy servant, who am sick in soul and 
body, О Virgin; for I have recognized thee as the Intercessor for all who find 
themselves amid grief, in that thou hast given birth to our salvation. 
Both now ..., Extending unto me a hand of salvation, О Lady, from the abyss 
of evils lead me up who am cruelly engulfed in the depths of sorrows and beset by 
the storms of boundless evil circumstances. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in spiritual 
fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine glory * grant 
them crowns of glory..  
Everywhere thou pourest forth streams of healing upon the sick, О Virgin; for 
the Lord of mercy, Who was born from thee in a manner transcending 
understanding, hath shown thee to be a wellspring of loving-kindness, О Lady. 
О Virgin Mother, thou didst become the beautiful chamber of the divine 
Word and a divine bridal-chamber in a manner transcending nature; wherefore, 
open unto me the mercies of thy compassions, and lead me up to salvation. 
Glory ..., All my strength hath drained from me due to the multitude of my 
boundless evils, and I have drawn nigh to despair because of my many sorrows. 
Help me, О Sovereign Lady who hast given birth to Life, thou consolation of 
those who weep! 
Both now ..., Have mercy, О only Mother of God, have mercy! Take pity on 
mine accursed soul, which is beset by wicked demons and passions as by a flood, 
and before the hour of my death deign to purify it. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Perceiving the profound counsel of God, * that the incarnation of 
Thee the Most High, * will be from a Virgin, * the prophet Habbakuk cried 
aloud: * Glory to Thy power, O Lord!  
The King of all, desiring thee as a royal root and womb, О Theotokos, made 
thee more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim, dwelling wholly within thee. 
Incarnate for the sake of human birth, the Creator was born from thee and 
hath shown thee to be a true intercessor for Christians; wherefore, I flee to thy 
protection, О pure one. 
Glory ..., Be thou my protection, help and refuge, for I am thy servant, О most 
pure Virgin, and cure me of my boundless evils, that I may chant to thee: Glory to 
thine ineffable birthgiving! 
Both now ..., I am at a loss, I weep and groan because of my passion-plagued 
thoughts, and I beseech thee, in that thou art a wellspring of mercy, deliver me 
from my pain, and lead me to divine compunction. 
ODE V 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God of 
all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all who 
hymn thee. 
Thou ever pourest forth the waters of healing upon all the infirm, О Virgin, in 
that thou art the animate cloud of Christ the King; wherefore, send down the dew 
of healing upon me who am sick. 
О Virgin Bride of God, cease thou never to entreat as Savior and Master Him 
Whom thou didst bear, that He grant me remission of sorrows and pangs, and 
lead me up to incorruptible joy, having forgiven me my transgressions. 
Glory ..., Thou art my hope and boast of salvation, О most pure one; 
wherefore, I flee to thy protection. Disdain me not who am now devoured by 
many and grievous pangs; but go thou before me, and save me. 
Both now ..., “How hangest Thou upon the Tree like a ripe cluster of grapes? 
О Sun of glory, how hast Thou been lifted up, at Whose suffering the light of the 
sun grew dim?”, the ewe-lamb who gave Thee birth, О Savior, exclaimed 
maternally, crying out to thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many 
sins hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O 
Greatly-merciful One. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Our God, the King of all, assumed human form from thee, О Virgin, and hath 
shown thee to be, as the Theotokos, more exalted than the cherubim and the 
awesome seraphim. 
О thou who alone hast given birth to the divine Life Who granteth salvation 
unto all, grant salvation unto me who am in despair, and cut through the uprisings 
of my passions. 
Glory ..., Grant me thine aid and deliver me from tribulations and sorrows, 
freeing me from perils and my transgressions, О thou who hast given birth to the 
Deliverance of all. 
Both now ..., In thee do we boast, О Virgin, and through thee are we delivered 
from evils. Let not us who trust in thee fear the assault of ungodly barbarians, for 
we hymn thee. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin Mother of God, a sword passed 
through thy most holy soul when thou didst behold thy Son and God crucified of 
His own will. Cease not to beseech Him, O blessed one, that He grant us 
forgiveness of our transgressions.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
All my strength hath been desiccated by the passions like clay, and lo! I have 
drawn nigh unto Hades. Deliver me from most pernicious bonds, О Mother of 
God, and with the hand of thy mercy rescue me from the griefs which assail me. 
All that is within me hath been rent apart by multifarious evils, and I am cut 
off from life by the multitude of my transgressions and infirmities; yet deliver me 
from them all, О most pure one, who for us hast given birth unto Life. 
Glory ..., In that thou art good, О most pure Virgin, grant that the kingdom of 
the all-compassionate Christ may be opened unto me, and that, by thy 
supplications, О blessed one, I may be delivered from soul-destroying pangs and 
assaults. 
Both now ..., Painful wounds have been inflicted upon me by my boundless 
transgressions and lead me to death of soul and body; yet rescue me from all 
sorrows and infirmities, О Lady, in that thou art mighty. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * and 
He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the Lord * 
and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having fallen into a thicket of thorny passions, I am pierced by their sting; 
wherefore, I have fallen into despair, weighed down by bonds and temptations, О 
most pure Mother of Christ God. Delivering me from them, grant forgiveness of 
transgressions unto all by thy supplications. 
As thou art the candlestand of the light of the threefold Sun, dispel the 
darkness of my transgressions by the radiance of thy compassion, О Birthgiver of 
God, granting deliverance from oppressive pangs unto me who hymn and 
supremely exalt thy most pure Offspring with faith. 
Glory ..., Having made His abode wholly within thy womb, О Ever-virgin, the 
transcendent God ineffably became incarnate, making thee the helper and 
universal aid of the world. Wherefore, I beseech thee, that I may be delivered 
from my grievous sufferings and the bonds of my transgressions. 
Both now ..., At the hour of my death, О Virgin Mother of God, rescue me 
from the hands of the demons, from condemnation, sentencing, dread trial, the 
bitter toll-stations, the cruel prince, and everlasting fire. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap for 
joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the holy 
feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O all-
blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-virgin. 
The mortal race hath been exalted by thy birthgiving, receiving adoption 
through union with God; and the heavenly multitude joins chorus with those on 
earth, hymning thee as is meet, О pure one, as the Mother of our God, the refuge 
of the whole world. 
Bound withal by my sins, countless wounds and pangs, I call upon thine aid 
and assistance, О Lady, that thou grant me deliverance from every cruel 
misfortune and sorrow. 
Glory ..., With love I offer hymnody and song, and well-woven praise from my 
pain-wracked soul unto thee who hast given birth in essence unto Christ God. 
Rendering Him easily reconciled, and fulfilling all my petitions, О Theotokos, 
preserve me by thy supplications. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., О pure Birthgiver of God, enlighten the eyes of my soul, that the 
heavy darkness of sin may not overtake me, and that the abyss of despair may not 
swallow me; but do thou thyself save and pilot me, О thou unashamed intercessor 
of the faithful. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion. The rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE IV  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone IV: 
When Thou wast nailed to the Cross, and Thy side was pierced by a spear, 
Thou didst redeem us from the curse of the law by Thy precious blood and didst 
pour forth immortality upon mankind. О our Savior, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet; 
for He is holy. 
О Savior, the Hebrews nailed Thee to the Cross, from whence Thou didst call 
us from among the nations, О Christ, our God and Savior. Of Thine own will 
Thou didst stretch out Thy hands upon it, О Thou Lover of mankind, and in the 
multitude of Thy compassions didst deign to be pierced in Thy side by a spear. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When Thine unwedded Mother beheld Thee * hanging 
upon the Cross, * she lamented bitterly and cried out to Thee: * ‘What is this 
strange and new wonder, O my Son? * How is it that the lawless people have 
nailed to the Cross, * Thee, the Life of all, ** O my sweetest Light,?’ 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV: 
Go Thou quickly before us, О Christ our God, before we are enslaved to the 
enemies who blaspheme Thee and separate us. By Thy Cross destroy those who 
wage war against us, that they may understand what the Orthodox Faith may 
accomplish through the supplications of the Theotokos, О Thou only Lover of 
mankind. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
Nailed to the Cross on Golgotha of Thine own will, О Master, in Thy great 
goodness Thou didst heal me of the ancient wound of sin; for of Thine own will 
Thou wast placed there for the race of mankind, О our Savior Thou Lover of 
mankind, and Thou didst pour forth blood and water from Thy side upon those 
who hymn Thee with faith. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Advancing well by the power of the Cross, О holy passion-
bearers, by your endurance ye mightily cast down the adverse foe; wherefore, 
celebrating your honored memorials with faith, by your supplications we are 
sanctified through the activity and grace of the all-holy Spirit. О warriors of 
Christ, pray to the Savior on behalf of the world. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: The Virgin and ewe-lamb, beholding on the Cross the 
Lamb Who was born of her without seed, His side pierced by a spear, was 
wounded and with grief and cried aloud, exclaiming amid her pain: “What is this 
new mystery? How is it that Thou diest Who alone art Lord of life? Wherefore, 
arise, raising up our fallen forefather!”  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone III: 
On Golgotha Thou didst raise up again me who in paradise fell grievously 
through the bitter counsel of the slayer of mankind, for by the Tree Thou didst 
heal the curse that came from the tree, slaying the serpent who through deceit 
brought death upon me; and hast thereby given me divine life. Glory be to Thy 
divine crucifixion, О Lord! 
When the sun perceived that is was Thee, O Sun of righteousness, suspended 
on the Cross, О Christ, it dimmed its light. Creation shook, and the dead quickly 
arose from the grave as from sleep, О Word, hymning the divine might of Thy 
glory. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: O most immaculate Virgin, * Mother of Christ God, * a 
sword pierced thy most holy soul * when thou didst behold thy Son and God * 
crucified of His own will. * Him do thou never cease to entreat, O blessed one, ** 
that He grant us the forgiveness of our transgressions.  
ODE I 
Саnon of the precious and life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “The 
Cross is a weapon unto salvation,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, 
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the 
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
О Jesus Who stretched out the heavens, in that Thou art good and full of 
loving-kindness, Thou didst stretch out Thine own hands, radiantly calling to 
Thee the nations who were far removed from Thee. 
Protect me by Thy Cross, О Word my Christ, that I may not fall prey to the 
wolf, who seeks my destruction and every day lays snares and traps for me. 
To the martyrs: By your pangs, О martyrs, ye cast down him who hath 
brought pain upon all. Ye have now inherited the life which is devoid of pain, О 
blessed ones, ever easing every pain of our souls and bodies. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
To the martyrs: Bound for Christ, Who was willingly bound, and hath 
destroyed all delusion, О wise and holy ones, ye bound the greatly crafty one with 
unbreakable bonds; wherefore, ye are called blessed, as is meet. 
Theotokion: Thou didst remain a virgin even after birthgiving, О most pure 
one, for thou hast given birth unto God Who wast lifted up upon the Cross, 
lifting up mortals with Himself; wherefore, all of us, the faithful, acclaim thee to 
be blessed. 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, the acrostic whereof is “I 
offer entreaty unto the Virgin Theotokos,” in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
In that thou art she who is more pure than all creation, О most pure 
Birthgiver of God, by thy pure prayer purify my heart, which hath been grievously 
defiled by the impure passions. (Twice) 
By thy God-pleasing prayers to our Creator and God, О most pure Virgin 
Mother, deliver me from the tears and sighs that lie before me at the dread 
judgment which is to come. 
As thou alone, in a manner transcending understanding, hast by thy birthgiving 
freed the race of mankind from the curse, О most pure one, by thy supplications 
free me who am enslaved by carnal passions. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O 
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Lifted up upon the Cross, О Christ our God, Thou didst lift up those who had 
been cast down into corruption, casting down the enemy, О Master. 
The swords of the enemy were blunted when Thou wast pierced in the side, О 
hypostatic Word of the Father, and Eden was opened. 
To the martyrs: With rivers of fire the martyrs countered the rivers of 
delusion, and they quenched the flame of polytheism. 
To the martyrs: Crucified, your nails ripped out, О martyrs of Christ, ye slew 
the enemy and the serpent with the sword of your patience. 
Theotokion: Beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross, О Master, the 
unblemished Ewe-lamb hymned Thy might, lamenting tearfully. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more 
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
I beseech thee, who art more exalted than the cherubim, О Lady: My mind, 
which hath been brought low by the temptations of the serpent, do thou show 
forth as higher than the passions of the body. (Twice) 
At the dread trial, at which the Lord will sentence me who have sinned greatly, 
О all-immaculate one, let me find thee delivering me from condemnation. 
By Thy mercy, О Christ, transform my pitiless ways by Thy compassions; and 
by the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, do Thou save me the 
unmerciful one. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  
Seeing Thee, the Sun of glory, willingly lifted up upon the Tree, the sun 
clothed itself in darkness; the stones split asunder, and the veil of the temple was 
rent in twain. 
When Thou wast crucified and pierced by a spear, О Lord and Savior, at Thy 
command the sword which barred the way into Eden was withdrawn for the 
noble thief, who hymneth Thy might. 
To the martyrs: Protected by the sword of Thy Cross, О Lord, Thy passion-
bearers showed themselves to be unwounded by the arrow of evil, and 
demolished the unstable ramparts of the madness of idolatry. 
To the martyrs: To the Lord, Who in His loving-kindness impoverished 
Himself, ye brought yourselves as unblemished sacred sacrifices and whole-burnt 
offerings, О martyrs, receiving rewards for your pangs. 
Theotokion: When she who gave birth within time to the Timeless One, and 
who alone acquired immaculate virginity, beheld the Lord lifted up upon the Tree, 
her soul was rent with pain. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
O most pure one, who art the divine habitation of the Holy One Who hath 
poured forth His benefactions upon His creatures: Sanctify my soul and illumine 
my thoughts. (Twice) 
By thy prayers, О Lady, make steadfast my mind, which is hurled about by the 
wind of evil and is wholly engulfed by slothfulness; and rescue me from my fall. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
I now entreat thee, the animate palace of the heavenly King: By thy 
supplications show me, who remain a den of thieves, to be a dwelling-place of the 
Holy Trinity. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy 
Light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises 
in faith. 
From Thy pierced side, О Master, Thou pourest forth divine streams of 
incorruption upon me who have stumbled into corruption through the 
disobedience of Eve and the rib of Adam. 
Thy precious Cross is victory over the enemy, for Thou hast given it to us for 
the salvation our souls who hymn Thee with faith, О Word. 
To the martyrs: Having passed through the material fire of great tortures, as 
most radiant martyrs the dead have now been united with the fiery ministers. 
To the martyrs: When their flesh was maimed amid many sufferings, the 
spiritual love of the martyrs was firmly established. 
Theotokion: He Who alone is good, and Who entered into thine incorrupt 
womb, О most pure one, appeared incarnate and was crucified, that He might 
deliver us from corruption. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise 
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of 
Thy Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
О Lady, thou Ewe-lamb who hast given birth to the Lamb of God: Seek out 
my soul, which hath been led astray by the counsel of the serpent and through 
disobedience hath become lost in the mountains. 
By thy fervent supplication, О Ever-virgin Theotokos, toward the fervor of 
the Creator of divine love do thou piously impel my soul, which is frozen with 
cruel cold. 
О pure one, who art good and immaculate, by thy supplications free my 
wretched soul now from the stain of the passions, and make me to live in purity. 
Under the shelter of thy wings keep my soul like the apple of thine eye, О 
good and most pure one, and deliver me from the wickedness, vengefulness and 
torment of the evil spirits. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The Church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto 
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the 
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Though higher than all honor, Thou didst endure dishonor, that Thou 
mightest honor me who have wickedly dishonored myself, О Lover of mankind; 
and Thou savest me by Thy Cross. 
Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross and died, О Lord, making the slayer of my 
soul dead and full of all shame. And now, О my Creator, I hymn Thy power. 
To the martyrs: The most evil one, who wounded you, was wounded by your 
incurable torments and was cast down beneath your feet, martyrs; and is seen to 
be mocked by all. 
To the martyrs: The dust of the martyrs’ relics, which lieth in the grave, 
poureth forth healings and scattereth the demons like dust; healing the divers 
sicknesses of mortals. 
Theotokion: “The council of the violators of the law affixed Thee to the Cross 
with nails; and I now rend my heart with the sword of grief, О my Son!” cried 
out the Virgin, weeping. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О Virgin, thine Offspring is the Destroyer of death and the Life and 
Deliverance of those who die; wherefore, I beseech thee: Raise up my soul, which 
hath been slain. 
О Lover of mankind, by the intercessions of Thy Mother and of the countless 
hosts on high extend a helping hand unto me, who am tempest-tossed upon the 
deep of life. 
O field who gavest rise to the divine Grain, disdain not my soul, which hath 
been weakened and withered amid, a famine of godly acts, but water it with the 
divine grace of thy Son. 
Lull to sleep the movements of my bodily passions, and make the uprisings of 
my flesh subject to my mind, as if they were like a mule, О pure one, calming 
them with thy prayers as with sleep. 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
О only Eternal and Immortal One, Who dost array the skies with clouds, and 
Who didst will to be crucified naked upon the Tree: Thou hast clothed in shame 
him who of old stripped our forefather naked. 
Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross raising up fallen Adam; Thou wast pierced 
in the side with a spear, О Master, and the greatly crafty one was dealt a mortal 
blow. Blessed is Thy might, О Lord! 
To the martyrs: Though most beautifully united to the most comely Word, О 
all-praised spiritual athletes, ye have not separated yourselves from the world; and 
though ye were bound and broken, ye ever trample the enemy underfoot. 
To the martyrs: By your divine sufferings, О glorious spiritual athletes, ye truly 
cast down the walls of the citadel of deception; and ye have been revealed to be 
bulwarks and fortresses for the faithful, who piously bless you. 
Theotokion: О maiden seeing Christ God, Who put forth dew in the furnace 
and in nowise consumed thy Womb, hanging upon the Tree, thou didst glorify 
His condescension, which was beyond thy comprehension. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О maiden, thou divine mountain, from whence the Stone was quarried Who 
crushed the pillars of the idols: Do away with the graven images of my soul and 
the stony doubt of my heart. 
As the one who received in thy womb Him Whose gaze brought about the 
earth and causeth all that is in it to tremble when He so desireth, thou wast not 
shaken, О maiden; wherefore, make me who am shaken by the assaults of the 
enemy steadfast. 
Casting down my carnal-mindedness, О Theotokos, show me to be wholly 
spiritual, adorned with the virtues, though the most evil one hath cast darkness 
over me by the ugliness of pleasures. 
О divine bowl of tender compassion and goodness, pour forth upon me in 
abundance the wealth of thy compassions, washing away the defilement of my 
transgressions; and quench thou the burning of my flesh. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
Thou didst extend Thy hands upon the Cross, О Master, desiring to cure the 
transgression of unrestrained hands, and wast transfixed with nails, О Lord, 
removing all the passion-fraught understanding of the first-formed man, who 
singeth: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
By the piercing of Thy divine side the record of first-formed Adam was torn 
asunder, О Master; and by the drops of Thy blood is the whole earth sanctified, 
which ever uttereth cries of thanksgiving: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
To the martyrs: The all-glorious martyrs stood in the midst of the fire as ones 
bedewed and unconsumed, truly chanting in mystic harmony the divine hymn of 
the youths: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
To the martyrs: Enduring the flickering fire by the power of your will, О 
martyrs, ye were not moved to vanity by your myriad torments; but, strengthened 
by God, ye hastened to the never-waning light, crying: Bless the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord! 
Theotokion: Seeing Christ, Who slew the enemy who brought death upon 
mankind, being put to death, the all-hymned Lady weeping hymned Him as 
Master; and marveling at His long-suffering, cried aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Thou hast given birth to the ripe Fruit, О Mistress, and eating of it death hath 
perished; wherefore, I cry unto thee: Grant life unto me who by deception have 
been slain by the fruit of sin, yet who cries aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord! 
With thy vigilant prayers, lull to sleep the passion-fraught movements of my 
mind, О most pure Lady, and rouse me from the sleep of slothfulness, that in 
vigilance of soul I may chant: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
О Theotokos, break asunder the bonds of my transgressions and still the 
uprisings 
of 
my 
body; 
hew 
down 
my 
wicked 
devisings, 
and 
quickly cleanse thy servant of secret thoughts, О intercessor and deliverance of all 
the faithful. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Art thou not afraid, О my soul, that thy countless evil deeds will be accusers 
indicting thee? Wherefore; repent before the supremely good One, and take the 
only most pure one to be thine ally, for she is a refuge for all mankind. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Behold, the Life of all appeared, hanging upon the Cross; and the sun, unable 
to endure the sight, withdrew its rays, the earth quaked, and the thoughts of the 
faithful are made steadfast in piety and purity. 
How can it be that the iniquitous assembly hath condemned to die upon the 
Tree Thee, the Giver of the law, Who art the Life and Lord of all, and Who 
through Thy sufferings poured forth immortality upon all mankind? 
To the martyrs: In the midst of lawless enemies ye wisely preached the 
incarnation of the Word of God with your divinely eloquent mouths, О all-praised 
ones; and having suffered in a sacred manner, ye have been crowned with wreaths 
of victory. 
To the martyrs: Like radiant daystars ye illumine all creation with the brilliance 
of sacred sufferings and the divine splendors of healings, О godly martyrs, 
dispelling the deep night of the passions. 
Theotokion: О pure one, enlighten my soul, which hath been darkened by 
sins, and drive away the clouds of mine evils, О cloud of the Light, who of old 
once beheld the sun dimmed when the Immortal One was crucified. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Sever the bonds of mine evils with the divine spear of thy Son; and loose thou 
my wretched soul, which is fettered and in distress, О Virgin Mother of our God, 
and bind it to the love of Him. 
О Virgin who art more spacious than the heavens, lead thou my heart up to 
the broad expanse of dispassion, for it is hemmed in by all the assaults of the 
adversary, and ever grant me the strength to walk the narrow path. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
That I may glorify thee who art truly most glorious, О Virgin, deliver me from 
all the irrationality of sin, and cause me, who flee unto thy mercy, to share in the 
glory of heaven. 
Confound all the counsels of those who have arrayed themselves against us, О 
Mother of God Most High, and fill with joy those who set their hope on thee, that 
we may all fervently proclaim thy help. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone IV: 
Let Thy Cross be for us a bulwark, О Jesus our Savior; for we, the faithful, 
have no other hope save Thee Who wast nailed to it in the flesh, granting us great 
mercy. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Thou hast given a sign unto those who fear Thee, О Lord: Thy precious 
Cross, whereby Thou didst put to shame the princes and rulers of darkness, and 
restoring us to our primal blessed state. Wherefore, we glorify Thy loving 
dispensation, О almighty Jesus, Savior of our souls. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: How can we fail to marvel at your struggles, О holy martyrs? 
For, clad in mortal bodies, ye vanquished the incorporeal enemies. The threats of 
tyrants did not frighten you, neither did the infliction of tortures daunt you. Ye 
have truly been glorified by Christ, as is meet. Ask ye great mercy for our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: Seeing Christ slain, Who hath put the deceiver to death, the 
most pure Lady cried aloud, exclaiming bitterly unto Him Who issued forth from 
her womb; and marveling at His long-suffering, she said: “O my most beloved 
Child, forget not Thy handmaiden! О Lover of mankind, delay not my 
consolation!” 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE IV 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone IV: 
Of old was Adam banished from paradise through the tree, but by the tree of 
the Cross, the thief hath come to dwell in paradise: the one by tasting rejected the 
commandment of the Creator, but the other, crucified with Christ, confessed the 
hidden God, crying out: Remember me in Thy kingdom! 
Thou wast nailed to the Cross in Thy great goodness, О Christ; and Thou 
wast pierced in the side, pouring forth two fountains of remission. Unable to bear 
the sight of such audacity, the earth quaked, the stones split asunder, the sun was 
extinguished, and the mountains and hills trembled in fear of Thy might. 
Setting aright the stumbling of our forefather, who of old stretched forth his 
hands unrestrainedly to the tree of knowledge, of Thine own will Thou wast 
stretched out and didst allow Thy hands to be nailed, O Long-suffering One, Who 
in Thy boundless goodness didst fashion us with Thy hands. Glory which passeth 
understanding be to Thy loving-kindness, О Word! 
To the martyrs: O ye saints, who by the most radiant brilliance of your 
struggles rendered the earth heavenly, and thereby dispelled the darkness of 
vanity; are now deified by communion, and have come to dwell in the never-
waning light, illumine ye with the light of understanding all who bless you as is 
meet. 
Glory ..., We render praise, glory and worship to the all-accomplishing Trinity; 
and offering angelic hymnody to the beginningless Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit with thrice-holy voices, we utter the cry of the noble thief, chanting and 
exclaiming: Remember us in Thy kingdom! 
Both now ..., Seeing her Son and God willingly lifted up upon the Cross, 
weeping and marveling, the most pure one said to Him Who maketh all things 
beautiful: “Whither hath Thy comeliness gone, O Lord? How hath the ungrateful 
council repaid Thee for the good things Thou hast done? I hymn Thy goodness 
which passeth understanding!” 
 
On Wednesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon, the hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
  
