--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE IV  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “As one valiant among the martyrs ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
О ye glorious ones, who with a most mighty understanding waged war, 
arraying yourselves against the wicked foe, for having valiantly armed yourselves 
with the weaponry of the Spirit, ye destroyed all the might of the demons, who 
seize men’s souls like plunder; wherefore, we honor you throughout the ages, О 
apostles. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Spreading out the net of the Faith in the form of the Cross, Thy twelve divine 
apostles dragged all the nations to the knowledge of Thee, О Christ, and dried up 
the salty sea of the passions; wherefore, I beseech Thee: By their wholly well 
pleasing supplications recall me from the depths of transgressions. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
With divine hymns let the divinely chosen and all-honorable twelve apostles be 
praised: Peter, Paul and James, Luke and John, Matthew and Thomas, Mark, 
Simon and Philip, the most glorious Andrew and Matthias, with the godly and 
most wise Bartholomew, and the seventy others. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in Tone IV: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
With divine myrrh, the divine grace of the Spirit anointed thee the chief 
hierarch of the people of Myra, for with most sacred virtues as with myrrh thou 
hast perfumed the ends of the earth, and with thy sweet-smelling supplications 
thou dost ever dispel the fetid passions; wherefore, we glorify thee with faith and 
keep thine all-holy memory, О Nicholas. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
As is meet, we bless thee, О Nicholas, as an ever-shining lamp, a universal 
luminary who hath shone forth in the firmament of the Church and enlightened 
the world, driving away the gloom of grievous misfortunes, dispelling the winter 
of griefs, and creating profound serenity. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
As one compassionate, and right loving, as a most fervent deliverer, and a true 
intercessor for the faithful who ask thine aid, О most sacred father Nicholas, 
appearing and manifesting thyself in dreams, thou didst save those who were 
about to die unjustly, О fellow citizen with the angels, who standest with the 
venerable and the righteous. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O all-pure one, * who hath contained the infinite God in thy womb * Who, in 
His love for mankind, hath become a man, * and hath received our substance 
from thee, * deifying it: * disdain me not who am now sorrowing, * but quickly 
take pity * and free me from divers enemies ** and the malice of the evil one.  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV: 
Thou didst enlighten the choir of the apostles with the Holy Spirit, О Christ 
God. By them wash away the defilement of our sin, and have mercy on us. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Thy Holy Spirit revealed the illiterate disciples to be teachers, О Christ God, 
and set at naught the deception of the pagans with their greatly eloquent harmony, 
in that He is almighty. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О martyrs of the Lord, ye animate sacrifices, noetic whole-
burnt offerings, perfect offerings to God, ye lambs who know God and are 
known of Him, and to whose fold the wolves have no entry: Pray ye that with you 
we also may be tended by the water of peace. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast given 
birth to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O thou 
who alone art the intercessor for our souls!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE IV  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, 
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the 
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
Truly, yea surely, thou hast given birth to the Lord God, and truly, yea surely, 
thou alone hast been called the Theotokos, О pure one. Wherefore, with faith we 
hymn and glorify thee as is meet. 
From thee, О most pure one, hath the Star shone forth out of Jacob, Who as 
God hath numbered the multitude of the stars. Wherefore, by His effulgence 
remove thou the darkness of my sins. 
Glory ..., I know thee to be clearly the rational bridal-chamber of the 
incarnation of God, О pure and all-immaculate one; and I entreat thee to deliver 
me from carnal passions, tribulations, temptations and evil circumstances. 
Both now ..., In that thou art the ladder of the coming of the Almighty unto 
us, whereby God descended to the earth, raise me up to heaven from earthly 
carnal passions, and lead me to God. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more 
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Thou art a wellspring pouring forth consolation upon the sorrowful, О Lady; 
wherefore, pour forth upon me a torrent of the waters of thy supplications, and 
quench thou the furnace of my passions. 
О pure one who hast healed the grievous wounds of our nature by giving birth 
to the Creator and Lord, heal me who am wounded by unseemly thoughts. 
Glory ..., Tempest-tossed amid the deep of my many transgressions, passions 
and temptations, О all-immaculate one, by thine aid I hasten to the most tranquil 
haven. 
Both now ..., By the divine Rain which descended into thy womb as upon a 
fleece, and with thy supplications, bedew thou my heart, which is aflame with the 
fire of the passions. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  
From the flowing ointment of thy Son, the Perfume of the life of all, О pure 
one, pour forth the myrrh of dispassion upon my soul, and remove from it the 
mire of its passions. 
With the hyssop of thy prayers sprinkle me who am defiled with the mire of 
sin, О Lady; wash me clean and cleanse me of the impurity of my passions, and 
show me to be a dwelling- place of Christ. 
Glory ..., I beseech thee, О most pure one, thou book inscribed and sealed by 
the finger of God: with the finger of thy supplications prescribe for me the 
remission of sins, and deliver me from perils. 
Both now ..., Thou wast the temple of God out of all the holy mountains, as 
the prophet said of old. Show me to be a pure temple of Christ, О Lady, by thine 
aid. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy 
Light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises 
in faith. 
Knowing thee to be the dew of Hermon which descended upon Sion, О 
Birthgiver of God, I pray that thou quench the burning of my flesh. 
As the paradise of life, О Theotokos, do thou quickly deliver me from deadly 
sin and the many and varied passions. 
Glory ..., О pure one, thou art the noetic phial of alabaster. Wherefore, with 
the perfume of the Myrrh Who was poured forth upon earth from heaven, do 
thou fill me now. 
Both now ..., Thou hast restored mankind who was inclined toward 
corruption, О Bride of God. Wherefore, lead me up now from the depths of 
transgressions and the passions. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The Church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto 
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the 
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having become the exceedingly beauteous palace of the King of glory, О 
glorious Lady, thou hast glorified mankind; wherefore, grant incorrupt glory to 
me. 
With pure incorruption thou hast allayed the vile corruption of nature, О most 
pure one; wherefore, dry up the torrents of my passions and the rivers of my 
carnal knowledge. 
Glory ..., Quell thou the passionate movements of my body and tame thou the 
uprisings of my flesh, making them subject to my mind as if they were a foal, О 
pure one, lulling them to sleep by thy prayers. 
Both now ..., I hymn thee who hast given birth to the supremely hymned God, 
О maiden, and I beseech thee: О Theotokos, deliver and save me from dreadful 
strife and everlasting condemnation. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
О intercessor unopposed, О Birthgiver of God, thou ready advocate for those 
who have recourse unto thee: deliver me from misfortunes, and disdain me not, О 
helper of all. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
In that thou art the fiery and God-bearing bush, О pure one, burn up the 
thorns of my wicked contemplations, illumine the thoughts of my soul, and dry up 
the abyss of my passions. 
Thou alone hast manifestly acquired the majesty and divine glory of eternity 
on the earth, having been revealed to be another heaven; wherefore, set at naught 
mine enemies, the boastful demons. 
Glory ..., О divine vessel of loving-kindness and goodness, pour forth upon 
me the riches of thy compassions in abundance, washing away the defilement of 
my transgressions, and quench thou the burning of my flesh. 
Both now ..., Having lived prodigally, I have ever wasted the spiritual wealth 
given me by God in carnal pleasures; yet by thy supplications do thou grant me 
justification, О Virgin. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Break thou the chains of my transgressions and quell thou the uprisings of my 
body, cut down mine evil thoughts and quickly cleanse thy servant of secret 
thoughts, О Theotokos, thou intercessor and help of all the faithful. 
О most pure one, who hast been shown to be the unquarried mountain of 
God, rich, densely wooded and overshadowed, shield me with the shelter of thy 
supplications, deliver me from the snares of the hunters, and preserve me from 
the darts of the demons and from vile thoughts. 
Glory ..., О Lady, grant that I may receive the fear of God and the spirit of 
compunction within me, and that I may bring forth a virtuous life; and render me 
frightful to the wicked demons and a partaker of the divine glory of the angelic 
choirs. 
Both now ..., Quickly open unto me the doors of life, the portals of my hope, 
О most pure one; guide me to life without end, and show me, thy servant, to be 
an heir to the kingdom of heaven and a partaker of the divine glory of the saints. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the 
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * 
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
In thy prayers look down upon thy servant, О pure one; go thou quickly 
before me, and deliver me from the invisible foes who afflict and oppress me. 
Save me from misfortunes, sorrows and multifarious evil circumstances. 
О Virgin, heal me who am condemned and wounded by the stripes of sin, and 
deliver me from wicked thoughts, О thou who hast given birth to the omnipotent 
Word, the good One Who lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., For the sake of Adam who of old fell into sin, thy Son, О 
exceedingly good one, Who hath dominion over life and death, partook of death; 
wherefore, by thy supplications raise me up from the passions and the fall. 
Both now ..., О Theotokos, from misfortunes and falls, from sin and tempest, 
from the passions of the body, from the billows and violent griefs of life, and 
from wicked malice save those who have recourse unto thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE IV  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone IV: 
О first enthroned apostles and universal teachers, entreat the Master of all, 
that He grant peace to the whole world and great mercy to our souls. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the end of the world. 
О Christ, Thou hast shown Thy disciples to be beacons unto the ends of the 
earth, shining forth the knowledge of Thee upon souls in darkness; and having for 
their sake cast the deception of idolatry into darkness, О Master, Thou hast 
enlightened the world with teachings of piety. By their intercessions save Thou 
our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Hearken speedily to our supplications, О Lady, and bear them to thy Son and 
God. Remedy the adverse circumstances of those who have recourse unto thee, О 
most pure Sovereign Lady, and confound the ambushes and fury of those who 
now array themselves against thy servants, О Virgin. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”: 
Your tidings raced round about the whole earth and rendered foolish the false 
wisdom of the unwise, О glorious apostles; drawing mankind from the depths of 
delusion, and showing the path of salvation unto all; wherefore, we now call you 
blessed, as is meet. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
О Savior, Thou hast shown Thy disciples to the world as preachers of the 
Faith, through them guiding the world to the knowledge of Thee; for with rays of 
the word they shed light upon all, dispelling the darkness of ignorance with faith. 
By their supplications save Thou our souls. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: In their sufferings, Thy martyrs O Lord, received imperishable 
crowns from Thee, our God; for, possessed of Thy might, they set at naught the 
tyrants and crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save 
Thou our souls.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Lady, hearken to thy servant, for I cry out from the depths of my pain-
wracked soul, and grant me the remission of my many evils, for thee do I have as 
an intercessor day and night. О Theotokos, deliver me from the fire of Gehenna, 
and set me at the right hand of thy Son and God. 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Go Thou quickly before ...”: 
The Sun of righteousness emitted you like rays to enlighten the whole earth, О 
glorious apostles. By your divine prayers ye illumine all with the never-waning 
light of God, enlightening those who celebrate your holy memory with faith. 
Go thou quickly on before, О Nicholas, and save thy servants from the 
misfortunes and tribulations which assail us, for thou hast boldness before God 
the Creator; wherefore, come now speedily unto those who call upon thee with 
faith, granting us thine intercession and protection. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou who art more exalted than all created beings, I am in doubt as to how 
to worthily hymn thee O Theotokos, have mercy upon us for we freely entreat 
thee.  
ODE I 
Canon of the holy, glorious and all-praised apostles, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, 
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the 
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
As divine instruments of the Comforter, ever heralding Him with divine 
inspirations, the right glorious apostles of Christ have played for us a truly salvific 
song. (Twice) 
О glorious eye-witnesses of Christ, grant enlightenment unto me who languish 
on the bed of slothfulness and am grievously wasting away in the death of sin 
through sickness of spirit. 
О apostles who by your discourse loosed the irrationality of the nations, by the 
grace of the Comforter enlighten my heart, which hath, been grievously darkened 
by irrational acts, О apostles. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: Thou didst remain an incorrupt virgin even after birthgiving, О 
thou who in a manner transcending understanding hast given birth to Him Who 
for our sake appeared on earth. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He enlighten 
our souls. 
Another canon, of the holy hierarch Nicholas, the acrostic whereof is “This is the 
fourth weaving for Nicholas,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the 
mighty strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as 
on a timbrel * I may chant a hymn of victory. 
Having inherited the life which is devoid of grief, О blessed one, ever filled 
with, spiritual joy drive all grief from my soul, I pray, that, rejoicing, I may glorify 
thee, О most sacred father Nicholas. 
Thou wast set upon the lampstand of exalted virtues, and like a lamp dost 
enlighten the hearts of the faithful, О holy hierarch Nicholas; wherefore, I entreat 
thee with faith: By thy luminous prayers drive away darkness from my soul. 
О most wise father, overwhelmed now by the abyss of this corrupt life and 
divers temptations, fleeing unto thee, I cry: Let me find thee to be a helmsman 
who by thy divine supplications transformeth the storm into calm. 
Theotokion: О pure one, who art possessed of ever-vigilant prayer, lull to 
sleep the passions of our souls by thy sacred mediations, granting us divine and 
saving watchfulness for the fulfillment of the will of God. 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, O 
Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
The currents of Thy disciples, Thy noetic rivers, О God, gladden Thy city with 
sanctity. (Twice) 
О citizens of heaven, fellow ministers with the noetic ranks, all-glorious 
apostles: Deliver us from all tribulation. 
О Christ Who established the apostles, Thy noetic heavens: By their prayers 
establish me steadfast upon the rock of Thy will, in that Thou art full of loving-
kindness. 
Theotokion: In that the Mother who gave Thee birth in purity prayeth with 
the choir of the disciples, О Lord, grant us Thy mercies. 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more 
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Thou wast revealed to be a sword slaughtering the rampaging foe, О Nicholas; 
wherefore, preserve us unharmed by their temptations, that we may do the will of 
God. 
Heal the broken state of my soul, О holy hierarch who broke all the snares 
and traps of the enemy, that with faith I may honor thee, mine intercessor. 
О father Nicholas, who didst raze the lifeless temple of Venus, by thy divine 
mediations demolish the passionate fantasies of my mind. 
Theotokion: Thee have we acquired as an intercessor, О most pure Virgin. 
Transform our grief into joy, and deliver us from the sorrow which giveth rise to 
death. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  
Thou didst ride Thy chosen steeds into the sea, О Lover of mankind, and they 
roiled the waters of false belief, proclaiming to all the true understanding of Thee. 
(Twice) 
О glorious apostles, ye stars who have enlightened the noetic firmament of the 
Church with piety: Deliver me from the night of ignorance and transgressions. 
Having been shown to be like well-honed arrows, О apostles, quench now the 
burning arrows of mine evil, making steadfast my thoughts. 
Theotokion: By the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee, and those of Thy 
sacred apostles, О Christ, heal my soul with their effective remedies, for it hath 
been embittered by venom through the sting of the adversary. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thy most glorious life, О Nicholas, hath everywhere shown thee to be most 
glorious, radiant with divine miracles, the adornment of hierarchs and boast of all 
who honor thee with hymns of joy, 
Resplendent with the divine rays of humble-mindedness, thou didst praise 
God on thine exalted cathedra, О blessed one, and by thy right acceptable 
supplications, О wise father, thou hast caused us to also partake of them. 
Afire with priestly zeal, thou didst deliver those unjustly led forth to be slain, 
О father; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Rescue us thus from the perils which 
cruelly slay the heart. 
Joyfully going about the heavens, О father Nicholas, stand forth invisibly 
before all who call upon thee, easing the sickness of our souls and granting us 
consolation in a godly manner. 
Theotokion: The angelic armies are filled with awe, О most pure one, hymning 
the majesty of thy divine birthgiving. With them pray, О Virgin, that all may be 
saved who bless thee with pure faith. 
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy 
Light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises 
in faith. 
The Cause of all gave you to drink of noetic gladness, О glorious apostles, 
who art branches putting forth the grapes of life. (Twice) 
О apostles, unto the light of the commandments of God guide those who 
mindlessly remain in the darkness of despondency of soul. 
Deliver us from transgressions of soul and from the judgment which is to 
come, from corruption and misfortunes, О blessed apostles. 
Theotokion: Save me, О God, Thou Lover of mankind! Save me by the 
supplications of her who ineffably gave birth to Thee, and of all Thy divine 
apostles! 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise 
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of 
Thy Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Dying, О wise father, thou didst set like the sun, but in Christ thou hast shone 
forth in the luminous effulgence of thy miracles, illumining the whole world, О 
Nicholas. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
О sacred Nicholas, hearken unto us in these days, when temptations and 
tribulations befall us, relieving all oppression by the grace of the Spirit Who 
dwelleth within thee. 
In that I have a soul broken by the passions of life, I call upon thee for help, О 
sacred Nicholas: Hasten thou, and grant me perfect healing, entreating the 
supremely good One! 
Theotokion: Beholding thee with noetic eyes, О Virgin, Isaiah cried out: 
Behold, Jesus the Lord will be born from the Virgin, the divine maiden, unto the 
regeneration of mankind! 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The Church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto 
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the 
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
О divinely chosen sheep of the good Shepherd, ye who are scattered 
throughout the world, by faith ye transformed all the bestiality of the wolves into 
the meekness of lambs. (Twice) 
O apostles, ye right fruitful trees of divine paradise, transform all the 
barrenness of my soul into the goodly fruitfulness of virtuous ways. 
I have been wounded by the sword of the passions and deadened thereby. О 
glorious ones, who received from Christ the grace to resurrect the dead, give life 
to my wretched soul, which hath been slain. 
Theotokion: Still Thou the raging storm of my soul, О compassionate God of 
all, by the supplications of the Theotokos who gave birth to Thee, and of Thine 
apostles and martyrs. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many 
sins hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O 
Greatly-merciful One. 
Thou wast strengthened by the might of the Savior, О divinely wise one, who 
art able to destroy the invisible foe. By thy prayers, О father Nicholas, deliver us 
from his grievous harm. 
By thy sacred supplications, О most glorious Nicholas, deliver us from 
torment in Gehenna, and from the most harmful oppression of wicked men. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
The military officers, who of old were unjustly sentenced to die, were 
delivered by thine intercessions, О right wondrous one. Rescue us from all harm 
as thou didst them. 
Theotokion: Thy people and city entreat thee, О Mother of God: Rescue us 
from all need, О all-holy Lady, and from eternal damnation in the life to come. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
With the strength of your all-holy preaching, О true apostles of Christ, ye have 
broken the winter of deception and enlightened the minds of the faithful with the 
knowledge of God. (Twice) 
Ever pouring forth fragrant myrrh, О divine disciples, fill with the sweet smell 
of noetic myrrh those who have recourse unto you, and drive away the foul-
smelling passions. 
О glorious disciples of the incorrupt Word, save me, who am become corrupt 
through carnal offenses, yet who sing: Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy 
glory, О Lord! 
Theotokion: The choir of the angels, the choir of the martyrs and Thine 
apostles, О Word, ever entreat the magnitude of Thy loving-kindness: Through 
the Theotokos have pity on all, in that Thou art compassionate. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: The three youths in Babylon, * regarded the tyrant's command as 
foolishness, * and cried aloud in the midst of the flame: * Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord God of our fathers!  
О holy Nicholas, entreat the one Creator of all, Who resteth in the saints, that 
He sanctify us and send down upon us His rich mercies. 
Holy, righteous and meek, gentle and humble, О glorious one, thou didst 
ascend to the most glorious heights of the priesthood, working signs and wonders. 
Keeping the laws of God, О venerable one, thou wast revealed to be a most 
pure temple of God; wherefore, we cry aloud: О all-blessed one, deliver thy 
servants from all iniquity! 
Theotokion: Put down the uprisings of the passions of my soul, and by thy 
vigilant supplications grant me watchfulness, О maiden, driving far away the 
slumber of despondency. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
О mouths of Christ inspired by the fire of the Spirit, ye who closed the 
mouths of the unrestrained and spread the preaching of salvation everywhere: Ye 
have delivered from the jaws of the noetic wolf those who cry aloud: Hymn the 
Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! (Twice) 
Sound ye the melodious trumpets of Christ round about my deadened soul, О 
glorious apostles, and raise it up from the grave of despair and despondency, that 
it may chant: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages! 
By the prayers of Thy disciples, О Christ, disdain me not, who with depravity 
of mind have trampled underfoot Thy laws and, a prodigal, have stumbled 
headlong into the abyss, and am ever captive to wicked habits. 
Theotokion: О Mary, Sovereign Lady of all, by thy supplications free me, who 
am dominated by the serpent and ever sin; that I may labor for Christ in a pure 
life, and chant: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages! 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All 
ye works bless and hymn the Lord. 
Making proclamation concerning divine things, О Nicholas, thou didst clearly 
shut the gaping mouths of the iniquitous, and from the corruption of Arius 
delivered many, who chant in a Orthodox manner: Hymn the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
О holy one, thou namesake of victory, by thy prayers show us forth, who ever 
pray to thee with faith, as victors over the passions which engender death, and 
over the lying tongue of all-iniquitous men. 
Send down upon us thy salvific help, O wonderworker Nicholas, that we may 
be succored in the day of need when we call upon thee with faith, we pray thee. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Triadicon: In an Orthodox manner, О ye faithful, let us worship the Holy 
Trinity, glorifying the Father, the Son and the all-holy Spirit, crying aloud: Bless 
and hymn the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Theotokion: Grant me thy mercy, О blessed and all-pure one who hast given 
birth to the exceedingly merciful Word; stand before me at the hour of judgment, 
and deliver me then from damnation, О pure one. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
О apostles, ye chosen stones of the Stone set as the Chief Cornerstone, ye 
have built up the hearts of all the faithful, toppling the foundations of the enemy 
with the rock of the Faith. (Twice) 
О apostles, who received from Christ the authority to loose and to bind, loose 
the bonds of mine evils, bind me to the love of God, and cause me to share in the 
kingdom, of God. 
О divine clouds of the Master, with divine showers water my heart, which hath 
become dry through every evil deed, and show it to be fruitful. 
Theotokion: With the holy angels, with the divine apostles and the glorious 
martyrs, О most pure Birthgiver of God, entreat thy Son and God, that He deliver 
our souls from misfortunes. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the 
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * 
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
Ever working healings, О venerable Nicholas, thy tomb poureth forth fragrant 
myrrh upon those who approach it with faith and love, burying the assaults of 
illness; wherefore, we all call thee blessed. 
Like the sun thou dost shed light upon the whole world, О divinely blessed 
Nicholas, driving away the darkness of grievous circumstances with the radiance 
of divine miracles by thy sacred mediations, О adornment of hierarchs. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
As is thy wont, have pity, О Nicholas, upon those who are ever cruelly 
tempest-tossed by the circumstances of life, the deceptions of the demons and the 
temptations of wicked men, that we may all call thee blessed. 
О my soul, be thou mindful of the dread day and hour, when the Master will 
call thee to trial and judge thy secret acts; and cry out to Him: О Savior, save me 
by the prayers of Nicholas! 
Theotokion: We joyfully offer thee the salutation of the divine Gabriel, and we 
cry aloud: Rejoice, О paradise who ever hast within thee the Tree of life, О most 
glorious palace of the Word! Rejoice, О all-immaculate Virgin! 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone IV: 
Thou didst enlighten the choir of the apostles with the Holy Spirit, О Christ 
God. For their sake, wash away the defilement of our sin, and have mercy on us. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Thy Holy Spirit revealed the illiterate disciples to be teachers, О Christ God, 
and set at naught the delusion of the pagans with their greatly eloquent harmony, 
in that He is almighty. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Precious is the death of Thy saints, О Lord! For broken by 
swords, fire and freezing cold, they poured forth their blood, placing in Thee their 
hope, that they would receive reward for their toils. They endured, О Savior, and 
have received great mercy from Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thee have we obtained as a rampart, * O most pure Theotokos, * a favorably 
calm harbor and confirmation. * Wherefore, I who am tempest-tossed in this life 
beseech thee: ** do thou guide me and save me!  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE IV  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone IV: 
Of old Adam was banished from paradise through the tree, but by the tree of 
the Cross the thief hath come to dwell in paradise: the one by tasting rejected the 
commandment of the Creator, but the other, crucified with Christ, confessed the 
hidden God, crying out: Remember me in Thy kingdom! 
As reason-endowed members of the flock of the Lamb and Shepherd, О wise 
ones, ye were sent by Him like lambs into the midst of wolves to preach God; and 
ye transformed their savagery into meekness, so that with faith they cry out with 
steadfast intent: Remember us, О Savior, in Thy kingdom! 
Passing over the fullness of the earth, like radiant stars, О apostles of the 
Lord, ye loosed those darkened by deception and shone the light of salvation 
upon the deceived; wherefore, we call you blessed, О preachers of Christ, and ask: 
Ever pray to the Lord for us! 
To the martyrs: Consumed by material fire and slain, О wise and blessed ones, 
ye utterly consumed the tinder of bitter polytheism; and ye now pour forth 
streams of healings upon those who approach you with faith, and cry out fervently 
unto Christ, exclaiming: Remember us in Thy kingdom! 
Glory ..., With unwavering resolve and sobriety of mind let us say unto Him 
Who in the highest is enthroned with the Father and the Spirit: О indivisible 
Trinity, Who in the beginning created all things by Thy word and enlightenest all: 
In Thy kingdom remember us who call upon Thee with faith! 
Both now ..., Thou art truly the never-fading wreath of the passion-bearers, О 
Birthgiver of God, joy of the apostles, all-immaculate maiden. With them, О Lady, 
ask deliverance from transgressions and correction of life for us who petition thee 
with faith and cry out to thee: Rejoice, О thou who art most truly the treasury of 
good things! 
 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
  
