--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING: TONE IV  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Emulating the sufferings of Christ, the Lover of mankind, О passion-bearers, 
ye gave your bodies over to wounds, and bitter torments, and innumerable pangs, 
ever looking forward to the divine delight of paradise, to ever-abundant 
sustenance and everlasting glory; and having received this, ye pray for those who 
hymn you. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Repeat: Emulating the sufferings of Christ ..., 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
О most sacred pastors, as glorious emulators of Christ, the Chief Shepherd, 
the King of all, ye readily laid down your lives for the sheep, and endured grievous 
misfortunes, О right blessed ones; and as champions ye save the divinely chosen 
flock unharmed by cruel wolves. 
Then, these Stichera, of the holy martyrs, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
O ye martyrs of the Lord, living sacrifices, noetic burnt-offerings, perfect 
offerings to God, lambs who knew God and are known by Him, whose fold no 
wolf can enter: Pray ye that with you we may also feed beside the waters of rest. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Precious is the death of Thy saints, O Lord. Slain by the sword, and by fire 
and freezing cold, they poured forth their blood, placing all their hope in Thee 
that from Thy hand they would receive the reward of their labors. They endured 
to the end and received from Thee O Savior, Thy great mercy. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
O saints, since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, unceasingly 
entreat Him for us sinners, asking that remission of sins, and great mercy, be 
granted to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion: 
Prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in psalmody unto Him 
Who hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God was well pleased without 
father to become a man from thee, * the Queen who standeth at His right hand, * 
and He - the source of life - showed thee to be His mother, * that He might renew 
His own image, corrupted by the passions. * Having found the lost sheep 
wandering on the mountain * He hath laid it upon His shoulders, * that He may 
bring it to his Father; * and in accordance with His own will * unite it to the 
heavenly powers * and thus, O Theotokos, save the world, ** Christ, Who is 
richly and abundantly merciful. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise up 
against me redeem me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
To the martyrs: Thou art glorified in the memorials of Thy saints, O Christ 
our God; by their intercessions send down upon us great mercy. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
To the martyrs: O Thou Who hast accepted the patient endurance of the holy 
martyrs; in Thy love for mankind do Thou accept our hymns of praise, and by 
their intercessions send down upon us great mercy. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: With the souls of the righteous who have reposed, O Savior, 
grant rest to the souls of Thy departed servants, preserving them in the life of 
blessedness which is in Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou inextinguishable lamp, * and throne of righteousness * most pure 
Sovereign Lady: ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY NIGHT: TONE IV  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the 
mighty strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as 
on a timbrel * I may chant a hymn of victory. 
From the mire of the passions, from the threefold billows of wicked thoughts, 
from the darts of the evil one, and from, every assault of the adversary, deliver my 
wretched soul, О most pure Birthgiver of God, and rescue me from everlasting 
fire. 
Lead me up from the abyss of transgressions, О pure one, and guide me to the 
light of the divine commandments of Christ God our Savior; shine forth upon me 
the saving radiance of repentance, and grant me eternal life. 
Glory ..., Having fallen into the evil mire of my wicked deeds, I am choked 
greatly on mine evils, and I find no firm place whereon to stand, О Virgin Lady 
and Mother, lead me up by thy power, and deliver me from fire and torment. 
Both now ..., Thou hast destroyed death and corruption, О all-hymned 
Theotokos, having given birth to Christ, the Wellspring of incorruption, Who 
hath adorned human nature with immortality and grace, О most immaculate one. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more 
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Having been made manifest, О pure Virgin, take the darkness away from, my 
soul, break asunder the bonds of sin, and save me by thine assistance, I pray. 
My heart, which hath been whirled about by the assaults of the passions, do 
thou make steadfast in the most pure fear of God, О most immaculate Virgin, by 
thy loving-kindness. 
Glory ..., Despairing of any hope, О most immaculate one, I have fled to thee 
as my mighty preservation and shelter. Wherefore, take not away from me thy 
divine protection. 
Both now ..., Arrayed like a queen in robes inwrought with gold, О Lady, thou 
standest now at the right hand of God, praying for thy servants. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
О divinely blessed maiden, free me who am held fast by despondency, am 
wholly darkened by the gloom of the passions, and am enslaved to sin; and join 
me to thy Son and our God. 
In that thou hast given birth to Life, О most immaculate one, give life to me 
who have been slain by the malice of the deceiver; for to thee have I fled. Lead me 
up who have been engulfed by abysmal falls, in that thou art merciful, О all- 
immaculate one. 
Glory ..., I lie in the tomb of mine unseemly pleasures, and am held fast by 
despondency and slothfulness. Yet, О good one who hast given birth to the 
Resurrection of all, enliven and save me! 
Both now ..., Of old, О Virgin, the prophet called thee the sacred mountain of 
God, wholly overshadowed by the virtues, from whence the saving Word 
appeared, unto the edification and enlightenment of our souls. 
ODE V 
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise 
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of 
Thy Father's divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
May my lowly soul rejoice to fear thy Son, О Lady, and to carry out His com-
mandments with, a willing heart. О all-immaculate and most pure one, guide me 
by thy supplications. 
О good Lady, grant that my passion-plagued soul may confess the Redeemer 
with all my heart, dispelling the ignorance of my heart, О all-immaculate one. 
Glory ..., Keep thou my soul as the apple of thine eye under the shelter of thy 
wings, О good and most pure one, and deliver it from the oppression and tyranny 
of the evil spirits. 
Both now ..., О most pure one, thou hast appeared, delivering from the 
assaults of the passions and the evil demons thy servant who hath acquired thee as 
a mighty ally and unashamed intercessor. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Prefiguring Thy three-day burial * prophet Jonah praying in the 
belly of the sea-monster cried aloud: * Deliver me from corruption * O 
Jesus Thou King of hosts. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Cast down those who ever wage war upon me, О Lady, and dispel the clouds 
of mine evil thoughts, О Mother of God who art the portal of the Sun of 
righteousness. 
Shine upon me the radiance of repentance, О Lady, and break through the 
clouds of mine evil thoughts, for I have been attracted and corrupted by grievous 
corruption. 
Glory ..., Still thou the raging billows of my passions and quell the storm of 
mine evil thoughts, О most immaculate one, thou steadfast intercessor and 
protection of all. 
Both now ..., The transgressions of my soul have multiplied more than the 
sand of the sea, and like a heavy burden they crush me; yet, taking pity, О Virgin, 
save me before the end. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
We, the faithful, bless thee as the Theotokos, our helper and fervent aid amid 
misfortunes, our reconciliation with God, by whom we have been delivered from 
corruption. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the 
flame of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, 
blessed art Thou. 
О pure Theotokos, I call upon thee with faith: Keep safe my lowly heart, and 
deliver me from the flame of torment and everlasting darkness. 
With, the spear of thy Son, О pure Virgin, rend asunder the record of my 
transgressions, and deliver me, I pray, from all restraint at the hour of mine end. 
Glory ..., With the streams of my tears and the down-pouring of thy 
compassions, О pure Virgin, quench thou the furnace which the multitude of 
mine evils have prepared for me through the activity of the demons. 
Both now ..., From the temptations which assail us and from every torment. О 
thou who alone art the Ever-virgin Mother of the Word, do thou deliver us who 
truly hymn thee with understanding throughout all ages. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All 
ye works bless and hymn the Lord. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Heal thou my ailing soul, О Theotokos, Virgin Bride of God; illumine my 
darkened mind, and rescue me from fire and the indescribable and everlasting 
torments. 
Bent beneath the weight of irrational passions, I have fallen into the abyss of 
destruction and have made myself fuel for the flame; yet do thou deliver me, thy 
servant, from thence, О Virgin Theotokos. 
Glory ..., Dry up the depths of mine evils, О thou who hast given birth to the 
Abyss of loving-kindness, the Redeemer and Lord, and before the end loose thou 
the bonds of mine evils, О thou who hast given birth to the Savior of all. 
Both now ..., The Lord Who became incarnate through thy womb, He Who 
hath dominion over all creation, showed thee, О Virgin, to be the Sovereign Lady 
who reigns over all creatures, visible and invisible, glorifying thee as His 
immaculate Mother. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the 
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * 
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
My heart, which is barren of divine virtues, О most pure Virgin Theotokos, do 
thou show forth as fruitful, in that thou wast born from a barren woman at the 
command of, and by the will of, Him Who transformeth all things: that I may 
hymn thee, the all-hymned one. 
With thy light illumine me, О most immaculate one, for thou hast given birth 
to the unapproachable Light; burn away the clouds of my passions, rescue me 
from the darkness devoid of light, and grant unto me divine light, that I may 
hymn thee, О Virgin Mother. 
Glory ..., With the sprinkling of thy compassions, О pure one, cleanse my 
putrid heart, and grant that I may ever shed my tears in streams, and cutting off 
the torrents of the passions, may I be delivered from torment. 
Both now ..., O right loving Theotokos who hast given birth to the right 
loving God, do thou now quickly free me from wicked carnal love, that I, who am 
perishing through slothfulness, may serve the will of God, О Lady. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE IV  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Today the armies of heaven have arrived for the memorial of the passion-
bearers, to enlighten the minds of the faithful and to illumine the whole world 
with grace. Entreated by them, О God, grant us great mercy. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Armed with Thy Cross, O Christ our God, Thy passion-bearers defeated the 
machinations of the enemy, the author of all evil. They illumine mankind like 
radiant torches, guiding us, and granting healing to those who ask with faith. By 
their intercessions save Thou our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God incarnate 
in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for our sake, * 
and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our souls from 
death. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone IV: 
In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from 
Thee our God. For possessed of Thy might they cast down the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our 
souls. 
 Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * but the Lord shall 
deliver them out of them all. 
Adorned with the blood of Thy martyrs throughout all the world, as with 
purple and fine linen, Thy Church crieth out to Thee through them, О Christ 
God: Send down Thy compassions upon Thy people, and grant peace to Thy 
commonwealth and great mercy to our souls! 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord.  
For the reposed: In Thy loving compassion and almighty power, O Christ 
God, grant rest to the souls of those taken unto Thyself from this temporal life; 
Have mercy and forgive them all their transgressions; Have mercy, O merciful 
Lord on the work of Thy hands, by the prayers of the Theotokos, since Thou 
alone lovest mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O pure, all-immaculate one who knewest not a man, who alone hast given birth 
within time to the timeless Son and Word of God, with the holy and honored 
patriarchs, the martyrs, prophets and the venerable, entreat Him, that He grant us 
purification and great mercy.  
ODE I 
Canon of the holy martyrs, hierarchs, the venerable and the departed, the 
acrostic whereof is “I praise with splendor the godly friends of Christ,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: O Thou who wast born of the Virgin, * drown I implore Thee, in the 
depth of dispassion * the triune nature of my soul, * as Thou didst the 
mighty strongholds of the warriors, * that in the mortality of my flesh * as 
on a timbrel * I may chant a hymn of victory. 
The honorable Church is ever made splendid by the radiant struggles of the 
spiritual athletes of the Lord, and rendering worship it glorifies Christ, the Sun 
Who shone forth from the Virgin and dispelled the darkness of deception. 
With, faith let us praise the holy hierarchs of Christ, who shepherded well the 
chosen people; and let us praise the whole assembly of those who lived in holiness 
and by their spirit mortified the pleasures of the body. 
Might was given by God to women who by grace trampled down the enemy in 
fasting and mighty suffering. By the supplications of them and Thy holy prophets, 
О Lord, send down Thy mercies upon all. 
For the reposed: О Christ, justify Thy servants whom, in Thy righteous 
providence, Thou hast taken from this corruptible life unto true life; and, 
overlooking their transgressions, grant that they may join chorus with all Thy 
righteous ones. 
Theotokion: Delivering us from the primal condemnation, the Son of God 
became thy Son, О pure one; wherefore, adopted for thy sake, we bless the 
heavenly Father, hymning thee. 
Another canon, of the departed, which we chant when there is no 
Menaion, the acrostic whereof is “A fourth rule: remembering our end,” in 
Tone IV: 
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of old, 
* and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * the 
power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Keep Thy servants at Thy right hand, О Savior, and, entreated by the passion-
bearing martyrs, guide them to the pasture of immortality, that they may behold 
Thy beauty. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Overlooking their transgressions, grant, О Christ, that they who have reposed 
in faith may inherit Thine ineffable and blessed glory; and justify them by grace, 
through the shedding of Thy blood . 
Glory ..., By Thy life-bearing death Thou didst slay the slayer, О Christ God. 
Grant rest now to Thy faithful servants, whom Thou hast received, and to whom 
Thou givest Thy life. 
Theotokion: When the Son of God, Who is comely in supremely exalted 
beauties, yet became incarnate from thee, О Virgin, was lifted up upon the Tree, 
He was bereft of beauty, taking upon Himself death for all. 
ODE III 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: The bow of the mighty hath waxed feeble * and the weak have 
girded themselves with strength: * Therefore my heart is established * in 
the Lord. 
Slaughtered like lambs, the right victorious martyrs were offered unto Christ, 
the Lamb and Word of God Who was slain for the deliverance of all. 
As mouths of God, the initiates of the sacred mysteries brought forth worthy 
people from among the unworthy, enlightening them with sacred teachings. 
The company of the venerable have found inexhaustible sustenance through 
their asceticism, delighting in the sight of divine things and in spiritual ascents. 
For the reposed: By the intercessions of all Thy saints, О Christ, grant rest 
unto those who have departed in faith, overlooking all the transgressions they 
have committed in their life. 
Theotokion: We offer praise unto God Who through the Virgin was born in 
the flesh, and Who hath united the choirs of women to those of the angels. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Not in wisdom, nor in power do we glory, * but we glory in Thee O 
Christ, * the Hypostatic Wisdom of the Father, * for there is none more 
holy than Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Having triumphed over the deception of idolatry, the martyrs now entreat 
God the Master, that He grant divine rest unto those who have previously 
reposed. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Be Thou well-pleased to withdraw the flaming sword, О Master, that Thy 
servants who have reposed may partake of the tree of life. 
Glory ..., Grant that Thy servants may dwell amid the sustenance of paradise, 
where the pure voices of those who keep festival are heard, О Christ, granting 
them remission of their offenses. 
Theotokion: Thou didst combine virginity with a divine birthgiving, О most 
pure one; for thou didst ineffably give birth to the Creator of all things, unto 
Whose will all submit. 
ODE IV 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus the 
true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he hath 
saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
The most sacred company of martyrs hath been glorified; and by their 
members they have glorified in a sacred manner, the Lord Who is glorified by all 
the angels, and they pray that we be delivered from all tribulation. 
Possessed of a mind resplendent with immaterial radiance, О godly hierarchs, 
ye dispelled the night of all delusion, and with true instruction guided the divinely 
chosen flock of Christ to understanding. 
The innumerable multitude of the venerable hath been adorned, the sole 
triumph of divine women hath been magnified, and the holy council of the 
prophets hath been honored, united, rejoicing, with the councils of the angels 
For the reposed: Having become fellow citizens with the angels, О holy 
martyrs, ask remission for all those who have fallen asleep, a dwelling in divine 
paradise, and ultimate deliverance from transgressions. 
Theotokion: He Who preserved thee a virgin after thine incorrupt birthgiving 
hath glorified the virgins who stand round about thee. With them do thou 
unceasingly pray that our souls be saved from every sorrow and peril. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon the 
Cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry aloud: * 
Glory be to Thy power, O Lord!  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Shown forth as luminaries, the martyrs enlighten the sky of the Church, and 
they entreat Christ the Savior to grant remission unto those who have fallen 
asleep. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Possessing Thy Cross as a rod of power, thy servants have passed through the 
sea of the world, О Lord, and Thou hast caused them to dwell in Thy mountain, 
wherein Thou didst make Thy sanctuary. 
Glory ..., Thy servants, whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, О 
Master, be Thou well-pleased to settle in Thy truly beloved habitations, where the 
souls of the righteous dwell. 
Theotokion: The Immortal One, Who hath dominion over the living and the 
dead, becoming incarnate as a man from thee, О Mother of God, endured death 
in the flesh, destroying the power of death. 
ODE V 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a holy 
Light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy praises 
in faith. 
Suspended upon crosses, broken on wheels and dismembered, the mighty 
martyrs appeared before God wholly intact. 
As saviors of the faithful, О holy hierarchs, ye brought to the Lamb and 
Master those who were entrusted to you to shepherd in holiness. 
Having withdrawn from the tumults of the world, О venerable ones, ye 
calmed hearts stirred up by the passions, and became children of the God of all. 
For the reposed: О ye divine prophets, О company of women who were 
pleasing unto God, ask rest for those who have fallen asleep before us. 
Theotokion: God, Who made His abode within thee, О most pure Virgin, hath 
made us divine habitations of His glory. 
Canon of the reposed  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Thou didst glorify the martyrs of Thy dominion, О Lord; for their sake grant 
rest unto those who have fallen asleep before us, in that Thou art full of tender 
compassion. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
О greatly Merciful One, grant unto those who have died before us never-
ending life, beauteous joy and unceasing gladness. 
Glory ..., О only good One, Source of goodness, grant rest unto those who 
reached the end of their life in faith and the knowledge of Thee. 
Theotokion: We hymn thee, О Mother of God, through whom the ineffable 
and unapproachable Light hath shone forth on those in darkness, and we bless 
thee with love. 
ODE VI 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: I have reached the depths of the sea * and the tempest of my many 
sins hath engulfed me; * but do Thou raise up my life from the abyss * O 
Greatly-merciful One. 
Like most costly stones most wisely rolling upon the earth, О martyrs, ye 
demolished the whole structure of ungodliness and became temples of God. 
From violent hands ye save all who are under your hands, О holy, righteous 
and venerable hierarchs, preserving the flock in Christ; wherefore, ye are called 
blessed. 
Following the sayings of the prophets, in sufferings and fasting the multitude 
of women pleased God the Word, Who shone forth from the Virgin. 
For the reposed: О greatly Merciful One, Thou Life of all, grant unto the dead 
who in faith have passed from us unto Thee the Creator, that they may dwell in 
the light with Thy saints. 
Theotokion: With mouth, tongue and heart I confess thee to be the pure 
Mother of our God, О maiden. By thy mediation deliver me from everlasting 
damnation. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The Church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * ‘I will sacrifice unto 
Thee with a voice of praise * having been cleansed of the blood of the 
demons' * by the blood that for mercy's sake flowed from Thy side. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Let the flaming sword, beholding the spear which pierced Thy divine side, 
withdraw before Thy servants, О Savior, by the supplications of Thy passion-
bearers. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Hanging upon the Tree, О my Savior, Thou didst open paradise. In that Thou 
art compassionate, cause those who have reposed in the faith to dwell therein, and 
show them to be partakers of Thy life. 
Glory ..., Grant that those who through death have passed over to Thee in 
piety, О Master, may delight in the pasture of life, and number them with the 
righteous of ages past. 
Theotokion: Though the Word is invisible God, yet He become visibly 
incarnate from the Virgin maiden who knew not a man; and by His death He hath 
destroyed death. 
ODE VII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Of old the Children of Abraham in Babylon * trampled down the 
flame of the furnace, * crying aloud with hymns: * O God of our Fathers, 
blessed art Thou. 
Together let us in gladness of soul hymn the martyrs of the Lord, the 
sanctified vessels of Christ the Master, the bulwarks and pillars of the Church. 
The holy hierarchs of Christ and the divine choir of all the venerable rejoice 
with the hosts on high. By their supplications, О Christ, save those who hymn 
Thee. 
The goodly endurance of the women who shone forth in holiness and 
suffering and with faith labored in asceticism hath cast down him who infected 
Eve with disobedience. 
For the reposed: О Thou Who hast destroyed Hades and trampled down 
death by Thy death, grant rest to those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself in faith, 
and cause them to dwell in paradise. 
Theotokion: Seeing the flame which did not consume the bush, the law-giver 
of old was taught an image of thy birthgiving, О ever-blessed Virgin Birthgiver of 
God. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, * 
burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Accepting the endurance and patience and the blood of all the martyrs, grant 
rest unto those who in piety have fallen asleep in Thee, in that Thou art merciful 
and right conciliatory. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Numbering the souls of Thy servants who have passed on to Thee among the 
firstborn and Thy righteous, О Savior, grant that they may unceasingly delight in 
Thee Who hast dominion over all. 
Glory ..., О Word of God, our Redeemer, in that Thou art merciful be Thou 
well-pleased, as God, that those whom Thou hast now taken to Thyself may meet 
Thee on the clouds, with gladness, confidence and splendor. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, О blessed Birthgiver of God, Virgin and Mother, for 
because of thee the destruction of death hath been wrought and life indestructible 
been granted to those who have reposed. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: O almighty Redeemer of all, * having descended and bedewed the 
children * in the midst of the flame, * Thou didst teach them to sing: * All 
ye works bless and hymn the Lord. 
The holy hierarchs, prophets and martyrs, who fought the sacred fight, have 
received a sacred habitation with the angels, and with them they ask that cleansing 
and great mercy be given to us all. 
Enlightened by the Spirit, the venerable ones dispelled the darkness of the 
demons; and with them the hieromartyrs and holy hierarchs, the prophets and the 
righteous, glorify God in praise. 
He who before boasted mindlessly that he would destroy the earth and the sea 
is ever trampled underfoot by the women who have zealously served God in 
asceticism and fasting. 
For the reposed: We beseech Thee on behalf of all who in faith have fallen 
asleep, О Christ: In that Thou art full of loving kindness, enroll them in the choirs 
of the saved, who unceasingly cry aloud: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Theotokion: О Lady, Birthgiver of God, who hast given birth to the right 
merciful Word, grant me thy mercy, and save me who cry aloud: Bless the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord! 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in their 
den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * quenched 
the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye works of 
the Lord. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Hearkening to the supplications of the martyrs and taking pity on that which is 
of the same stock as Thee, О Master, grant rest to the souls of those who have 
fallen asleep in faith in Thee, overlooking their sins, for they cry unto Thee: Bless 
the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Reckoned as one dead with the two malefactors, Thou didst pour forth 
immortal life upon the dead; wherefore, grant that Thy servants who have reposed 
in the hope of resurrection may receive Thy kingdom, О Savior, for they cry unto 
Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord! 
Glory ..., О Savior, Thou truly ever-flowing Wellspring of goodness, grant 
peace unto Thy servants, who have meekly left this corruptible life and found 
repose in the mansions of heaven, for they cry unto Thee: Bless the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord! 
Theotokion: Thou alone hast appeared on earth as a most pure virgin and 
mother who knew not wedlock, О Lady, for in a manner transcending all telling 
and comprehension thou hast given birth unto God, and hast poured forth eternal 
life upon the dead; wherefore, we all bless thee, О Mary, Bride of God. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Eve dwelt under the curse of sin * because of the infirmity of 
disobedience; * but thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * hast through the 
Offspring of thy pregnancy * blossomed forth blessing upon the world. * 
Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
Seeing the divine gifts and receiving honors for their great pangs, the martyrs 
rejoice, magnifying Christ Who truly magnified them and showed them to be 
victors. 
Having been ordained as bishops for the people and made yourselves radiant 
through fasting, О holy hierarchs who preached God, ye shone forth more 
brightly than the sun, illumining the faithful in the manifestation of great deeds, О 
venerable ones. 
Let us bless all the venerable and the righteous, the hieromartyrs and all the 
prophets, and the women who splendidly pleased God, crying aloud: By their 
supplications, О Christ, deliver our souls from Gehenna! 

--- PAGE 17 ---
For the reposed: Unto those who have passed over to Thee in faith grant the 
joy received by the saints who were well-pleasing to Thee, О Christ, overlooking 
their offenses, О Thou only abundantly merciful Lord. 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one who wast revealed to be more exalted than 
the cherubim, in that thou hast given birth to the Sustainer of all things, elevate 
my mind, strengthening me against the carnal passions, that I may do the will of 
the Master. 
Canon of the reposed  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Unto true martyrs and spiritual athletes Thou hast given the boldness to 
entreat Thee, О Lord. For their sake give divine deliverance unto those who have 
reposed, in faith, granting them to dwell in a place of holy habitation. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
О Thou Who by Thine all-creative hand dost work all things for the good, 
Who hast authority over the living and dominion over the dead: In that Thou art 
almighty, settle by peaceful waters Thy servants whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself. 
Glory ..., О Thou Who by nature art good, Who art rich in mercies and 
goodness, deliver from the outermost darkness those who call upon Thy name, 
justifying them by faith and grace, and enlightening them, in that Thou lovest 
mankind. 
Theotokion: The prophets proclaimed the images of thy birthgiving, О all-
immaculate one, and others have composed yet other titles for thee, for thou hast 
given birth unto the Life of those in Hades, Who destroyeth the might of death. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
On the Praises, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
Who is not filled with wonder, O holy martyrs, at beholding the good fight 
that ye have fought? For armed with the Cross and in the body confessing Christ, 
ye defeated the bodiless adversary; wherefore, as is meet, ye have been shown to 
be expellers of demons, and opponents of the barbarians, ever interceding that 
our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
O holy martyrs, ye have become companions of the angels, bravely preaching 
Christ at the tribunal; for having forsaken all the beautiful things of this world, as 
though they did not exist, ye held fast to the faith as your steadfast hope. 
Wherefore, putting deception to flight, ye pour forth gifts of healing upon the 
faithful, ever interceding that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
How shall we not marvel at your struggles, O holy martyrs? For, clothed in 
mortal bodies, ye vanquished the incorporeal enemies; the threats of tyrants 
roused no fear in you; neither did the infliction of tortures, fill you with fear. 
Therefore, as is meet, ye have been truly glorified by Christ, ask ye great mercy for 
our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Precious is the death of Thy saints, O Lord. Slain by the sword, and by fire 
and freezing cold, they poured forth their blood, placing all their hope in Thee 
that from Thy hand they would receive the reward of their labors. They endured 
to the end and received from Thee O Savior, Thy great mercy. 
 For the reposed: In a place of rest with Thee, O Lord, where all Thy saints 
repose, grant rest to Thy servants, for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., 
Where is the passionate attraction of the world? Where is the illusion of 
transitory things? Where is the gold and silver? Where are the multitude of 
servants and their clamor? All is dust, all is ashes, all is but a shadow. Come ye, 
and let us cry aloud to Christ Who is immortal: О Lord, grant Thine eternal good 
things unto those who have departed from us, granting them rest in Thy 
blessedness which waxeth not old. 
Both now ..., Theotokion:  
О only pure and most pure Virgin, who hast given birth without seed unto 
God: Pray thou that our souls be saved. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the departed, in Tone IV:  
Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Truly awesome is the mystery of death. How the soul is separated from the 
body, and this harmony and union is broken, and severed by the will of God. 
Wherefore we entreat Thee: In the dwellings of Thy righteous grant rest to those 
who have departed unto Thee, О Bestower of life, and Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. 
For those who believe in Thee, death is but a dream; for when Thou, the 
Master of all, wast laid in the tomb, Thou didst destroy the power of death, 
abolishing its ancient dominion. Wherefore we entreat Thee: Those who have 
departed unto Thee do Thou grant to dwell in the joy of Thy saints and the 
splendor of the just.. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Thou hast become our righteousness and sanctification, and the redemption 
of our souls. For Thou didst lead us justified and redeemed unto the Father, 
taking upon Thyself the punishment and debt due from us. And now we entreat 
Thee: Grant rest to the departed in the joy and radiance of Thy saints, O our 
Benefactor and Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Following, the words of the divinely eloquent prophets, O all-
immaculate One, we believe thee to be the Theotokos. For thou didst ineffably 
give birth to God in the flesh, Who hath delivered us from the bondage of sin. 
Ever beseech Him, that He illumine thy departed servants with the radiance of 
His Light. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE IV  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone IV: 
Of old Adam was banished From paradise through the tree, but by the tree of 
the Cross the thief hath come to dwell in paradise: the one by tasting rejected the 
commandment of the Creator, but the other, crucified with Christ, confessed the 
hidden God, crying out: Remember me in Thy kingdom! 
Afire with the love of Christ, О holy martyrs, with the dew of your struggles ye 
quenched the fire of ungodliness; and ye were shown to be greatly radiant lamps 
of the Church, driving the darkness of infirmities and tribulations from our souls 
by your goodness; wherefore, we praise you as is meet. 
О sacred hierarchs, ye divine company of the prophets, ye choir of the 
venerable, ye sole procession of holy women, who pleased God with virtuous acts 
and have been glorified: We bless you, praying through your supplications, that we 
may receive enlightenment and life everlasting. 
For the reposed: Where Thy light shineth, and where the choirs of the saints 
rejoice, whence sighing and pain have fled, do Thou number Thy servants, who 
have reposed in times past and departed this most painful life, О Christ, that they 
may hymn Thine ineffable goodness; and overlook the transgressions they 
committed on earth. 
Glory ..., О indivisible Trinity, Who art worshipped in the Father, the Son and 
the Spirit, О Unity of three Hypostases, united in every way though with 
uncommingled characteristics: By the supplications of Thy holy martyrs, the 
fathers and the honorable prophets, grant rest unto those who have died in the 
Faith, and grant purification to their souls. 
Both now ..., Thou didst conceive the Word Whom the Father begot before 
the morning-star, and hast given birth, to Him in the flesh as a perfect man, 
known in two activities and wills, О most pure one. Wherefore, entreat Him as 
the Creator and Lord, that He have pity on us who hymn thee, О maiden Bride of 
God. 
 
On Saturday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, * O ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
And for the Departed, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
 Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 
 Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
Another, for the departed: 
Communion Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to 
Thyself, O Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
  
