--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE V  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
I weep and am downcast, envisioning the dread sentence of the Word, for 
which I, a wretch, have not the least reply for my guilt. Wherefore, I pray: Before 
the unseemliness of mine end overtaketh me, before I am mowed down by death, 
before I must needs be condemned to the place where the fire is unquenchable 
and the darkness is absolute, where are the worm and gnashing of teeth, and 
sinners are consumed, О my Christ, grant me great mercy and deliverance from 
mine offenses. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Disdaining Thy laws and the Scriptures, wretch that I am, I have rejected Thy 
commandments, О God my Creator. How will I ever avoid the torment which is 
to come, О Savior! Wherefore, before mine end grant me forgiveness and a 
shower of tears, imparting true compunction to me, О Savior. As Thou art the 
supremely good God, drive far from me the hordes of the demons who seek to 
drag me down into the abyss of Hades, for I entreat Thee: Take not Thine 
almighty hand from me! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Woe is me! How have I been darkened in mind? How have I withdrawn from 
Thee and, wretch that I am, enslaved myself to sin; and, enslaved to the passions, 
given myself wholly over to carnal pleasure which liveth within me, who am 
passion-fraught? Now I await my departure from this life and the coming 
reckoning. О supremely good Lord, grant me tearful repentance and release from 
my countless transgressions, for with faith I beseech Thee Who grantest the world 
great mercy. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the incorporeal ones, in Tone V: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
О honorable initiates of the mysteries of the Godhead, the thrice-radiant and 
consubstantial Divinity, who, unceasingly offering up hymnody with incorporeal 
mouths and fiery tongues, bear our supplications and prayers, which we utter with 
defiled lips, and who ask for remission of sins: He. Who assumed our nature and 
is merciful by nature doth accept your pleas on behalf of His sinful servants, 
granting great mercy to the world. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
О ye whole multitude of the angels, who draw nigh to my Master and stand 
with fear before His divine throne, full of ineffable light; guide me to the light of 
salvation for I have gone astray in the darkness of sin, and at the command of our 
compassionate God dispel the dark and alien gloom of the crafty demons with 
your help and grace; for they cannot endure, and are driven away, by the coming 
of light. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
О radiant angels of God, standing before the divine throne of grace, receiving 
humility and true enlightenment from the divine light: Look down on us from the 
heavens, О ye who love mankind, for we are beset by the storm of evils, and are 
afflicted and sleep in darkness. Wherefore, come to our aid, О archangels, and 
deliver us from the snares of the enemy, the author of evil; for we all flee to your 
protection, О all-famed ones. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou art truly higher than the throne of the cherubim, for the divine Word 
made His abode within thee, О pure one, desiring to restore our image; and 
issuing forth from thee as mortal, in that He is full of tender compassion, He 
endured the Cross and suffering for our sake, and as God hath given us the 
resurrection. Wherefore, giving thanks to the Creator with faith, we beseech thee 
as the one who transformed our condemned nature, that we may receive forgive-
ness of transgressions and great mercy by your prayers. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 
our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone V: 
O Lord, I cease not to sin, nor do I perceive Thy love for mankind which 
Thou hast granted me. Vanquish my lack of discernment, O Thou Who alone art 
good, and have mercy on me.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
O Lord, from reverent fear of Thee I tremble, yet I cease not from committing 
sins. Who, when called to trial, doth not fear the judge? Or who, desiring to be 
healed, angereth the physician, as I do? O longsuffering Lord, have compassion 
upon my weakness, and have mercy on me.  
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Not caring for all earthly things, and manfully braving 
tortures, ye were not disappointed in your goodly hopes, but became inheritors of 
the kingdom, of heaven, О all-famed martyrs. Having boldness before God the 
Lover of mankind, ask peace for the world and great mercy for our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O strange, awesome and great mystery! * The Un-circumscribable One hath 
made His abode within a womb, * and a Mother remaineth a Virgin even after 
birthgiving, * for from her she gave birth to God Incarnate. * To Him, then, let us 
cry aloud, * to Him let us raise a hymn, * chanting with the angels: * Holy art 
Thou, O Christ God, * Who wast incarnate for our sake! ** Glory be to Thee!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE V  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
A truly awesome miracle was wrought within thee, О Virgin, for thou didst 
bear in thy womb Him Who is in nowise circumscribed, and hast ineffably given 
birth to Him, remaining a virgin. 
Rain down remission of sins upon me, О Lady who didst ineffably contain the 
Rain of heaven which came upon thee. 
Glory ..., О only blessed and divinely joyous one who hast given birth to 
ineffable Joy for al mankind: take the grief away from my soul, I pray, and gladden 
my heart. 
Both now ..., He Who shone forth from thee in His surpassing goodness is all 
the desire and sweetness of life, О most immaculate one. Him do thou beseech, 
that He save me who now unceasingly glorifies thee. 
ODE III 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
The works of the law have passed by as though they were a shadow; for Thou, 
О most pure one, hast given birth unto Christ Who in place of the law hath 
appointed for us the grace of purification and enlightenment, and hath lifted the 
curse, О all-immaculate Virgin. 
God was born in the flesh from thee, О pure one; He Who before was 
invisible became visible. Wherefore, earnestly entreat Him, О maiden, that He 
deliver me who glorifies thee with splendor, from enemies visible and invisible. 
Glory ..., Cruel waves of the passions assail me, the abyss of evil spirits besets 
me, and the tempest of sin troubles my heart. О Birthgiver of God, make me 
steadfast, for I hymn thee with splendor. 
Both now ..., Having the divine Gabriel as our commander, with faith we cry 
out reverently together to the Theotokos and Mother who knewest not wedlock. 
By her we have been delivered from tribulations, sorrows and infirmities. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
О Virgin who within thyself wove a robe of incorruption with thy virginal 
blood for Him Who clothes the sky with clouds, clothe me who before was 
stripped naked through deception. 
Thy womb, О Virgin, became a holy and ineffable palace for God the King, in 
which He made His abode; whereby He hath made us temples. 
Glory ..., As thou art compassionate, have compassion on my most wretched 
soul, О all-immaculate Birthgiver of God, for it hath been cruelly darkened and 
fettered by the passions and sin. 
Both now ..., Thou didst shine forth the Scepter of the kingdom of 
incorruption from the root of Jesse, О pure one, and without knowing a man 
thou hast given birth to a Babe, the God of David, the Creator and Lord. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Even after giving birth thou hast remained an incorrupt virgin, О most 
immaculate one; leading all the corrupt toward Life, and illumining them with 
incorruption. 
To the Pre-eternal One, Who shone forth timelessly from the Father, thou 
hast given birth as a newborn Babe, О most pure one. Him do thou entreat on 
behalf of the world, О Bride of God. 
Glory ..., О let me find thee, О Virgin, to be my helper, rescuing me from the 
sentence of the Judge at the hour of judgment, when I shall stand before the 
tribunal of Him Who was born from thee. 
Both now ..., О Virgin Bride of God, my beloved from out of Lebanon, 
wholly beautiful and immaculate art thou. By the Holy Spirit the incarnation of 
the Son of God was made known in thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Without knowing a man, thou hast given birth to Emmanuel, Who hath taken 
pity on our lowliness, О Theotokos; wherefore, we ever glorify thee as is meet. 
O most holy one, in a manner transcending understanding and past all telling, 
thou hast given birth to the Timeless One, the Creator Who delivereth from all 
corruption those who hymn thee, the Theotokos. 
Glory ..., Having given birth to the Benefactor and Creator, О most holy and 
right-beloved Lady, bless thou mine afflicted soul. 
Both now ..., О all-pure one, we offer thee praise both new and old; for we 
have naught better for thy praise than “Rejoice!”, which we sing to thee with 
Gabriel. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
I lament for myself before the judgment, pondering mine evil and grievous 
deeds, and the abyss of transgressions which hath surrounded me from my youth 
and which drown my mind; yet by thy prayers, О pure one, grant me remission, 
and vouchsafe that I may receive salvation. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
Deliver me from evil despondency, from the darkness of the passions and 
everlasting condemnation, О most pure one, that I may glorify thee with faith. 
Mortify my passions, О thou who hast given birth to Life, and lift me up who 
lie in the grave of senselessness, О Bride of God, that I may glorify thee with love. 
Glory ..., О most immaculate one, thou hast given birth to the incorporeal 
God clad in the flesh, Who doth deliver us who chant with fear: Blessed art Thou, 
О God! 
Both now ..., Finding thy pure supplication to be priceless healing, О Virgin, 
chanting, we ask of thee goodly transformation of soul and health of body. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
О portal of the Light, open unto me the radiant gates of repentance, showing 
forth each straight path of righteousness leading into the entries of God’s will. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
О Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth on earth to a newborn Child, the Son 
Who is co-beginningless with the Father, Who in His ineffable loving-kindness 
became like unto us who have become corrupt through sin. 
Glory ..., О most glorious Ever-Virgin whom God hath loved and chosen, 
thou hast been revealed to be wholly elect, wholly all-adorned; wherefore, we 
hymn thee throughout the ages, О pure one. 
Both now ..., “Thou art wholly pure, full of divine glory, my dear one!” the 
Spirit of God said, proclaiming thee, О most pure one, whom we praise with 
hymns, chanting: Thou must needs rejoice, having given birth unto the God-man! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
Disdain not the sighs of those who now hasten unto thee, О all-pure one, but 
look upon us who are in sorrows, and transform our lamentation into joy, and our 
compunction into gladness, for we praise thee in hymns. 
Thou art an immovable foundation, О pure one, having given birth to the 
Savior Who founded the earth upon the waters by His divine commands. Pray 
thou that He splendidly establishes thereon those who call thee blessed. 
Glory ..., Thy birthgiving transcends understanding О Theotokos, for 
conception and a virginal birth took place within thee without the aid of a man; 
for it was God Who was born, and magnifying Him, we bless thee who gave birth 
to Him. 
Both now ..., Awesome art Thou, О Lord. Who then can withstand Thy threat, 
О Christ, only King, when Thou shalt render judgment? Wherefore, have pity and 
save me, О Savior, through the right acceptable supplications of her who gave 
birth to Thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE V 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone V:  
When the Judge taketh His seat and the angels stand before Him, when the 
trumpet sounds and the flame is kindled, what shalt thou do, О my soul, when 
thou art brought to judgment? For then thine evils will confront thee, and thy 
secret sins will be exposed. Wherefore, before the end cry out to the Judge: 
Cleanse me, О God, and save me! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Let us all keep vigil and greet Christ with a multitude of oil and radiant lamps, 
that we may be deemed worthy to enter the bridal-chamber; for he who findeth 
himself outside the gates crieth unto God in vain: Have mercy on me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Theotokos, in truth we confess thee * to be worthy of all praise; * truly 
higher than the heavens * and more holy than the cherubim. * Through thee we 
sinners gain salvation * and find protection in temptations! * cease not to 
intercede on our behalf, ** for thou art a strong support and refuge for our souls! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V: 
O my soul, the things here on earth are transitory, but the things of the life to 
come are eternal. I envision the tribunal and the throne of the Judge, and I 
tremble at the thought of giving answer. Wherefore, turn thou with haste, for the 
judgment is inexorable. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
I lie upon the bed of mine offenses, robbed of my hope of salvation; for the 
dreaming of my slothfulness winneth torment for my soul. О God Who wast 
born from the Virgin, raise me up to Thy hymnody, that I may glorify Thee. 
To the martyrs: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
The memory of the passion-bearers shineth forth today, for it possesseth 
radiance from the heavens. The choirs of angels keep festival, and the race of 
mankind celebrates with them. Wherefore, they entreat the Lord, that our souls 
find mercy. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Theotokos, thou who art of heaven with the angels * and of the earth with 
mankind, * we cry out to thee with a call of joy: * Rejoice, gate wider than the 
heavens! * Rejoice, thou who alone art the salvation of those born on earth! * 
Rejoice, O pure one, full of grace, * who hast given birth unto God incarnate.  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
О Savior, summon me as Thou didst the prodigal, for I am weighed down 
with irrational passions and have wasted my life in prodigality; do Thou accept 
me, and extend to me thy fatherly embrace in the loving-kindness of Thy 
compassions; and by the prayers of the incorporeal ones grant unto me mine 
ancient dignity. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O fervent and invincible intercessor, * diligent and unashamed hope, * 
rampart, protection and haven * of those who have recourse to thee, * O pure 
Ever-virgin do thou, together with the angels, * entreat thy Son and God, ** that 
He grant peace, salvation and great mercy to the world.  
ODE I 
Canon of repentance, the acrostic whereof is “Have pity on me who have 
sinned greatly against Thee, О Word,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Let us chant a hymn of victory * unto the Lord, Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * in the Red Sea, * for He hath been glorified. 
О Christ, in that Thou art almighty, turn unto me and have compassion on 
me, for I have been led astray and deceived by the many falsehoods of the alien 
one. 
О Christ Who opened the ears of the deaf man, open Thou the deaf ears of 
my soul, I pray, that I may hear Thy words. 
To the martyrs: As newly-revealed stars of Christ, the Sun of righteousness, О 
martyrs, dispel the darkness of our hearts. 
To the martyrs: Shown to be burning arrows set afire by the divine coals of the 
Holy Spirit, the spiritual athletes have broken all the arrows of the serpent. 
Theotokion: О portal of divine glory, open unto me the doors of repentance, 
and rescue my lowly soul from the gates of Hades, I pray. 
Another canon, of the incorporeal beings, the acrostic whereof is “The 
fifth hymn to the angels,” the composition of Theophanes, in Tone V:  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
О ye angels, initiates of the life-giving Godhead, shining with the light of His 
first- revealed rays, entreat the Master, that He illumine my soul with light. (Twice) 
As ye all have boldness, standing before the throne on high, О supreme 
commanders, captains of the ranks of heaven, from misfortunes deliver those who 
piously hymn you. 
Theotokion: The curse hath been annulled and grief hath ended; for the 
blessed and gracious one hath shone forth Christ, the Joy of the faithful, budding 
forth blessing like a flower for all the ends of the earth. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: God is King over the nations. * God is seated on His holy throne. * 
And with understanding we chant unto Him * as King and God. 
О good Lord, Who dost not will that even one person perish: With Thy 
merciful hand have pity and save me who am perishing by Thy command, О all-
Compassionate One. 
О Christ our Lord, Who knowest all the sins I have committed against Thee in 
knowledge and in ignorance, I approach and fall down before Thee: Accept me as 
Thou didst the prodigal. 
To the martyrs: That ye might slay living sin and show forth the enemy as 
dead, О blessed martyrs, ye paid no heed to the death of your bodies. 
To the martyrs: Adorned with sufferings and clad in raiment dyed with your 
blood, О martyrs, ye stand, crowned, before the King of all. 
Theotokion: О Virgin Mother who gave flesh unto God, accept the voices of 
those who ever cry out to thee, and deliver us from divers evil circumstances. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
О Thou Who by Thy word most wisely formed the choirs of the hosts on 
high, and Who showest forth Thine incalculable goodness: Through their 
intercessions make steadfast Thy Church, О only good One, and Lover of 
mankind. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Adorning the angels with ineffable radiance, and by them making Thy Church 
steadfast, О loving Christ, thereby enlighten my wretched soul, I pray Thee, О 
Master, remembering not my countless sins. 
Theotokion: Without uniting with a man thou didst become the Mother of 
God Who illumines the incorporeal choirs, that they might unceasingly hymn the 
one Godhead in three hallowed Lordships, О most pure and all-hymned Virgin. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The works of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * filled the prophet 
Habakkuk with wonder, * for Thou hast come to bring salvation to Thy 
people, * and to save all Thine anointed ones. 
The works I have done in this life are wicked and grievous. О Christ my God: 
deliver me from them, granting me sincere repentance. 
Every honorable commandment have I spurned; I have rejected the fear of 
Thee, О Christ, and I fear Thine inexorable tribunal. Condemn me not thereat, О 
Thou Who art full of loving-kindness. 
To the martyrs: All their limbs truly stretched out and secured with leather 
thongs, badly wounded with stripes and raked with iron claws, Thy spiritual 
athletes rejoiced with faith, О Word. 
To the martyrs: Using every means, the evil one was yet unable to move you 
from your divine stance, О spiritual athletes; wherefore, О valiant ones, ye have 
been revealed to be the divine confirmation of many who are shaken. 
Theotokion: The Lord became incarnate from thy pure blood, О all-hymned 
one, and by thy goodly mediations He grants repentance unto those who honor 
thee, in that He is compassionate, and alone the Lover of mankind. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
Thou didst form the angelic luminaries and hast right generously enlightened 
them with deifying rays, for Thou art mighty in power, О Lover of mankind, and 
keepest Thy word. (Twice) 
Let us set aside the worldly wisdom of our bodies, О ye faithful, emulating the 
life of the incorporeal ranks; and let us give wings to our mind. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Be thou an intercessor, refuge and haven for me, averting the 
storm of the passions, О most immaculate one, for thou hast incomparably 
surpassed the angelic choirs in goodness. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: О Christ God, Thou true Light, * out of the night my spirit riseth at 
dawn unto Thee. * Show forth Thy countenance upon me. 
Awake, О my soul, awake from the heavy sleep of grievous sin, and enlighten 
thyself with the light of repentance. 
Let us diligently restore our souls and drink in showers of compunction, that 
we may produce the grain of repentance. 
To the martyrs: Sharpened with the coals of love, О passion-bearers, ye were 
shown to be divinely forged swords, felling the hordes of the enemy. 
To the martyrs: Not being enslaved by the enemy, ye instead enslaved him, О 
passion- bearers, and showed yourselves to be close friends of Christ. 
Theotokion: О Virgin who art blessed among women, grant thy mercies to thy 
people, for thou hast been revealed to be the Mother of the Merciful One. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Traveling all the ends of the earth, ye bring the benefactions of the Master 
unto the faithful, and preserve them, О all-glorious archangels. (Twice) 
Submitting to Thy word, О Word of God the Father, the glorious orders of 
the heavenly ranks are illumined with the light of Thine effulgence. 
Theotokion: All my desire do I set before thee, О thou who, in a manner past 
all telling, hast given birth to the Sweetness of desire for those who acknowledge 
thee to be the Theotokos, О pure one. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Thou didst deliver the prophet from the whale: * Do Thou O Lord 
lead me up from the depths of sin * and save me. 
There is no sin in this life which I alone have not committed, wretch that I am. 
О only Sinless One, have pity on me. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Propelled by the sail of zeal, let us all hasten to the harbor of salvation by 
repentance, that we may be saved. 
To the martyrs: Creation is enlightened by the suffering of the preachers, 
apostles and martyrs. Enlighten us also by them, О Lover of mankind. 
To the martyrs: Let us all honor the martyrs, the vessels containing divine 
radiance, the honored emanations. 
Theotokion: О Virgin, intercessor for the faithful, entreat the Lord, that thy 
servants may be delivered from every sin. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 
О chosen assemblies of the angels, adorned with sanctity, ye shine with light-
giving effulgence, manifestly perfected by deifying brilliance. (Twice) 
Richly all-adorned with thrice-radiant beams, О ye angels and archangels, in a 
godly manner illumine my wretched soul with your prayers. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, thou didst conceive the Creator and God of all, 
upon whom the angels, rejoicing, gaze with fear, standing reverently before Him. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Blessed art Thou, O God, * who beholdest the depths * and sittest 
upon the throne of glory: * for Thou art supremely praised and glorified. 
Blessed art Thou, О God, and all-hymned and most glorious art Thou Who in 
thy tender compassion dost accept all who repent. 
Heal Thou my many passions, О supremely hymned and most glorious 
tenderly compassionate Christ, for Thou knowest my weakness. 
To the martyrs: The choir of passion-bearers was strengthened with divine 
power and vanquished the enemy, crying aloud: Thou art all- hymned and most 
glorious forever! 
To the martyrs: О Word Who gavest the most wise passion-bearers the 
strength to endure most subtle tortures, by their prayers have pity on us all, 
Theotokion: Blessed art Thou, О God Who, making Thine abode within the 
Virgin’s womb, saved mankind; wherefore thou art all-hymned and most glorious 
throughout all ages. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
Showing forth immeasurably powerful might, Christ appointed you, О 
supreme commanders, and taught you to chant: О God, Blessed art Thou! (Twice) 
О Thou Who with goodness adorned the countless multitudes of the 
incorporeal ranks, grant that the companies of mortals may hymn Thee, crying 
aloud: О God, Blessed art Thou! 
Theotokion: Make me now steadfast who am shaken by the passions, О 
Virgin for thou hast poured forth dispassion upon all the faithful, who chant with 
faith: О God, Blessed art Thou! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The Fashioner of all creation, * whom the angels fear: * let us 
praise, O ye people, * and supremely exalt throughout all ages! 
О Lord, enliven me who have become deadened by my trespasses, that I may 
glorify Thee throughout all ages. 
Enlightening me with repentance, О Lord, deliver me from the darkness of 
sin, that I may glorify Thee throughout all ages. 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearing martyrs, ye trampled the flame of delusion 
underfoot, most gloriously receiving dew from heaven. 
To the martyrs: Like fertile soil, О holy ones, ye truly produced grain a 
hundredfold for Christ, the Judge of the contest. 
Theotokion: From thee did God shine forth, О all-hymned Virgin, with divine 
knowledge enlightening those who have been darkened. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
The councils of the angels now move me to chant with hymns and heartfelt 
desire; and with them I sing: Hymn the Lord, all ye works, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages! (Twice) 

--- PAGE 15 ---
О servants of the most holy and three-Sunned Radiance, pray ye that they may 
be saved who chant with faith: Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages! 
Theotokion: О Virgin Mother and maiden, portal of the Light: With thy light 
illumine those who chant with faith: Hymn the Lord, О ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages! 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: We, the race of mankind, * magnify thee, * who art blessed among 
women * and blessed by God. 
О Lord, be merciful unto me for I have mindlessly committed innumerable 
sins, and grant me Thy kingdom, О Word. 
As of old Thou didst save the Ninevites who repented, О only Savior, by Thy 
mercy save us who hymn Thee. 
To the martyrs: Giving your flesh over to all manner of wounds, ye preserved 
your souls unwounded, О passion-bearers of the Lord, and sharers in divine glory. 
To the martyrs: Radiant daystars enlightening the souls of all on earth, ye 
showed yourselves to be passion-bearers of the Lord of all. 
Theotokion: Like a fiery throne thou bearest Him Who holdeth all things in 
His hand, О Virgin, and at thy breast nourished Him Who feedeth all. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
As commander of the angelic ranks, О most radiant Michael, and thou, О 
Gabriel, as the true herald of the divine incarnation: Preserve all who hymn you, 
О glorious ones. (Twice) 
О Thou who pourest out Thy treasures in rich gifts and Who appointed the 
angelic ranks: When Thou comest with them as Judge and King of all, save me 
who flee to Thy mercy, О Master. 
Theotokion: With faith the archangels, authorities and thrones, the cherubim, 
powers and seraphim, the radiant angels, principalities and dominions, noetically 
minister unto thy Son with trembling, О pure and all-blessed Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone V: 
Turn away from the multitude of my transgressions O Lord, Who wast born 
of the Virgin, and cleanse me of all my sins. I beseech Thee to grant me the 
thought of turning back unto Thee, for Thou alone lovest mankind, and have 
mercy on me.  
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Woe is me, to whom am I like? I am like the barren fig tree, and I fear that I 
shall be cursed and cut down. But, do Thou O heavenly Husbandman, make my 
barren soul fruitful, O Christ God, and receive me as the Prodigal Son, and have 
mercy on me. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Blessed is the army of the King of heaven, for though the passion-bearers 
were mortals, yet they strove to attain the dignity of the angels; and spurning the 
pangs of their bodies, by their sufferings they were deemed worthy of the honor 
of the incorporeal ones. Wherefore, by their prayers, О Lord, send down upon us 
great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou who art full of grace, * intercede by thy supplications, * and beg that a 
multitude of compassions be granted to our souls * and the cleansing of our many 
sins, ** we entreat thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE V  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone V: 
Believing Thee to be God, the thief on the cross confessed Thee, О Christ, in 
purity from the depths of his heart, crying out: Remember me, О Lord, in Thy 
kingdom! 
I have met with soul-corrupting thieves on the path of life, and they have 
wounded me. But now I flee to thy loving-kindness, О Christ. Heal and save me, I 
pray. 
The choirs of heaven hymn Thee, the God of all. By their sacred mediation 
overlook my many evils, О Master, and save me, I pray. 
To the martyrs: Having joined the angelic choirs, and been filled with never-
waning light, О spiritual athletes of Christ, dispel ye the fetid passions of my heart. 
Glory ..., О ye mortals, unto God Who is hymned by the angels in the highest 
let us chant the thrice-holy hymn: Holy art Thou, О beginningless Father, Son and 
Spirit! 
Both now ..., О pure one who received the Joy of the angels in thy womb, fill 
with joy my soul, which hath been downcast by mine evil deeds, and guide it to 
the light. 
 
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His minis-
ters a flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame 
of fire.  
  
