--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING: TONE V 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Woe unto me who have angered Thee, my merciful God and Lord! How many 
times have I promised to repent, О Christ, and have been found to be a senseless 
liar? I have soiled my first baptismal raiment, and have forsaken my covenant with 
Thee, and this second commandment, which I confessed before Thee in the 
presence of men and angels, have I also abandoned, clad in a lamentable form. 
Setting this aside, О Savior, leave me not to perish utterly. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath, waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
What answer shalt thou find on the day of judgment, О wretched soul? Who 
will deliver thee from condemnation to everlasting fire and other torments? No-
one, if thou thyself dost not placate the Compassionate One, forsaking thine evil 
deeds and acquiring a right pleasing life, every day weeping over thy countless 
transgressions, which thou committest at every hour in deed, word and thought, 
and beseeching Christ to grant thee the complete forgiveness of them. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Let sinful habit not seize me, dragging me down, О Savior, nor let the demon, 
which ever wageth war on me and subjecteth me to his will, gain dominance over 
me; but rescue me from his dominion with Thy mighty hand, О Almighty One 
Who lovest mankind, and reign Thou within me. Grant that I may be wholly 
Thine, and living according to Thy will, О Word, may find rest in Thee, and 
cleansing, salvation and great mercy for myself. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy forerunner, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О blessed Forerunner and martyr of Christ, heal me who am wholly bowed 
down to the earth and am incurably broken, yet I flee with faith to thy godly 
protection. And rescue me, I pray thee, on the dread day, when I shall come to 
stand before His judgment-seat, and shall be given over to torments; and as thou 
hast unashamed boldness, О wise one, deliver me from standing on the left hand 
of Christ, entreating Him Who granteth great mercy to the world. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
As a most radiant luminary of the Sun, О wise Forerunner of Christ, shine 
thou a ray of light upon me who have fallen down into the darkness of countless 
evils, I pray thee. Raise me up out of the pit of sin, guiding me by thy sweet voice. 
О thou who of old loosed the voice of thy father by thy birth, direct now my 
voice, I pray thee, that with faith and love I may glorify God the Savior, the Lover 
of mankind, Who grants the world great mercy. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Thou wast the divine temple of God, the Bestower of life upon all, О blessed 
prophet, Forerunner and herald, and didst have Him living in thy heart. Him do 
thou ever entreat, О most noetically rich John, that those who have recourse to 
thy holy temple and honor thee may become temples of the Spirit and draw nigh 
unto God, that in hymns we may honor thy help and fervent prayer, for He bore 
witness that thou art the greatest from all mankind, О right wondrous one. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
From my childhood I have been revealed to be a tireless committer of sins, 
having been grievously wounded in mind and lovingly remained such by my many 
evil habits. Downcast, I now weep over my cruel deception, mine evil habits and 
mindlessness, and the destruction of my soul. О Lady, disdain me not who am 
perishing in evil, but, taking pity, deliver me from every assault of the passions by 
thine aid, that if only in old age I may repent before God. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst 
hearken unto me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone V: 
O Lord, I cease not to sin, nor do I perceive Thy love for mankind which 
Thou hast granted me. Vanquish my lack of discernment, O Thou Who alone art 
good, and have mercy upon me.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
O Lord, from reverent fear of Thee I tremble, yet I cease not from committing 
sins. Who, when called to trial, doth not fear the judge? Or who, desiring to be 
healed, angereth the physician, as I do? O longsuffering Lord, have compassion 
upon my weakness, and have mercy upon me.  
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Having put on the breastplate of faith and armed themselves 
with the image of the Cross, Thy saints, О Lord, manfully gave themselves over to 
torments and cast down the pride and deception of the devil. As God almighty, 
send down peace upon the world through their entreaties, and great mercy upon 
our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Assuage the sufferings of my much-sighing soul, * O thou that wipest every 
tear from the face of the earth; * for thou dost banish the sufferings of mankind, * 
and dispel the sorrows of the sinful. * For in thee do we all have our hope and 
confirmation, ** O most holy Virgin Mother.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE V 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
О good and most immaculate one, grant me contrition of soul, humility of 
heart, purity of mind, correction of life, remission of transgressions and fountains 
of tears. 
Behold my tribulation and compunction, heal thou the stripes of mine ancient 
transgressions, and grant me time to repent and confess my sins. 
Glory ..., Pondering the abyss of mine evils, О all-immaculate one, I weep for 
myself before my departure; wherefore, I beseech thee: Entreat thy Son, that He 
deliver me from torment. 
Both now ..., As thou hast time for repentance, О my soul, depart from all evil 
and cry out with tears to thy Creator: О my God, save me by the supplications of 
her who gave birth to Thee! 
ODE III 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
The foremost of my passions have seized me, О most pure one, and have 
filled me with shame who have been created according to the image and likeness 
of God; yet deliver me from the harm thereof, for I hymn thee in compunction. 
The enemy wickedly seeks to hunt me down, desiring to show me utterly 
consumed in everlasting flame, О most pure one; yet set at naught his wiles and 
counsels, that, rejoicing, I may glorify thee. 
Glory ..., The enemies of the righteous have deceitfully set me in the uttermost 
pit of many offenses, yet as one now helpless and wholly wounded, I call upon thy 
supplication: О most immaculate Lady, save me! 
Both now ..., I have wasted my life in slothfulness, wretch that I am, and have 
now arrived at the gates of death; and, terrified of the assault of the enemy, I cry 
unto thee: deliver me from their temptations, that saved, I may glorify thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
I have been wounded by the darts of sin, and wounds now cover mine entire 
body; wherefore, I cry out to thee, О most pure one: by thy speedy prayers heal 
the wounds of my soul. 
Have mercy upon thy servants, О pure one; for we have acquired thee as our 
mediatress before God, and we pray that we be delivered from all want and 
everlasting torment. 
Glory ..., О good one, thou art my hope, shield and confirmation, my 
deliverance from evils, the enlightenment of my soul, my boast, bulwark and 
might. 
Both now ..., Prodigally have I wasted the riches of good works which Christ 
gave me, in that He is good. Yet disdain me not, О most pure maiden, for I am 
perishing of hunger. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Behold the weakness of my lowly soul, О Lady, the infirmity of my flesh and 
the captivity of my mind, and save me who am bereft of hope. 
God to Whom thou hast given birth do thou ever entreat, that He save all of 
us who confess thee to be the Theotokos, and glorify thy birthgiving, О most 
pure one. 
Glory ..., Who doth not call thee blessed, О all-immaculate one? For thou 
didst ineffably give birth to the one Master, the Savior of the whole world. 
Both now ..., О most pure one, send down upon me streams of tears, that, 
having purified myself of the defilements and blemishes of my sins, I may hymn 
the magnitude of thy goodness. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
I have been cast into the abyss of transgressions and iniquities, О all- 
immaculate one; yet stretch forth thy hand, and lead me up from the despair of 
Hades. 
I know the multitude of the offenses and thoughts which vex me; wherefore, 
hasten thou and deliver me, О most pure one. 
Glory ..., Take pity on thy servant, О Christ Master, by the supplications of 
her who in purity gave birth to Thee, when Thou shalt come to judge the world 
which Thou hast fashioned. 
Both now ..., О pure Lady, my soul hath been dragged down into the abyss of 
transgressions, to become food for the demons; wherefore, save me who am 
beyond hope. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
The greatly painful passions of my soul and the infirmities of my flesh do thou 
quickly heal; still the wandering of my mind, О most immaculate Theotokos, and 
grant that in serenity of thought I may offer pure prayers unto the King, and beg 
remission offenses. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
When I bring to mind the multitude of mine unseemly deeds and 
transgressions, О all-immaculate one, I am afraid and horrified. О Virgin, by thy 
prayers free me from them. 
The sleepless word and the unquenchable fire ever erode and devour my soul. 
Let me not become food for them, О most holy Theotokos. 
Glory ..., О all-immaculate Virgin, from the outmost darkness and dread 
torment deliver thy servants who cry out to thy Son: О God, blessed art Thou! 
Both now ..., I have defiled my flesh with shameful passions, and have 
darkened by mind with vile thoughts; yet take pity, О pure one, and save me, Thy 
useless servant. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Unto thee, the Theotokos, do I bring the weakness of my lowly soul, the 
infirmity of my heart and the delusion of my mind; and I cry aloud, asking thine 
aid, О Virgin. 
Be Thou merciful to Thy servants, О Word, through the supplications of her 
who gave birth to Thee, and save those who chant: О all ye works of the Lord, 
hymn the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth to Him Who hath willed mercy, have 
mercy upon all who chant with faith: О all ye works of the Lord, hymn the Lord 
and supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Both now ..., Deliver me from the outermost darkness and the worm which 
sleepeth not, О good Virgin, in that thou hast given birth to the Creator of the 
world; for all things whatsoever He desireth, He can accomplish by thy prayers. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
God to Whom thou hast ineffably given birth, О pure Lady, do thou earnestly 
beseech, that He deliver us from misfortunes and sorrows, and from the dread 
judgment which is to come; and that He grant unto us the splendors of His saints. 
I have sinned more than all others, disobeying Thy life-creating 
commandments, О Christ, making myself like the irrational beasts; yet by the 
prayers of Thy Mother, О Word, may I not be taken unrepentant from this life. 
Glory ..., In that thou hast given birth to the Word of God, the Abyss of 
mercy, О good one, have mercy upon the souls of all who flee beneath thy 
protection; for thee have we all acquired as an unashamed intercessor before God. 
Both now ..., Ask now for our purification and remission, deliverance from all 
needs, and correction of life which is pure and radiant, О Mother of God, that we 
may glorify thy great benificence. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE V  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone V:  
When the Judge shall take His seat and the angels stand before Him, when the 
trumpet shall sound and the flame kindled, what shalt thou do, О my soul, when 
thou art brought to judgment? For thine evils will then confront thee, and thy 
secret sins will be laid bare. Wherefore, before the end cry out to the Judge: 
Cleanse me, О God, and save me! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Let us all keep vigil and greet Christ with a plentitude of oil and radiant lamps, 
that we may be deemed worthy to enter the bridal-chamber; for he who findeth 
himself outside the gates shall cry unto God in vain: Have mercy on me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The strange mystery of the Virgin * hath been revealed to the world as salvific: 
* for from her wast seedlessly born, * and revealed in the flesh without 
corruption. * The Joy of all, ** O Lord glory be to Thee!  
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V: 
When thy deeds are laid bare, О my soul, and myriads of angels stand before 
the Judge, what answer shalt thou find for thy shame, if thou wilt not cry out, 
weeping, before the end: “I have sinned, О good Lord! Have mercy on me!”? 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
I lie upon the bed of mine offenses, robbed of my hope of salvation; for the 
dreaming of my slothfulness winneth torment for my soul. О God Who wast 
born from the Virgin, raise me up to Thy hymnody, that I may glorify Thee. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Thou hast given us an indestructible bulwark, О Christ God: 
the miracles of Thy holy martyrs. By their prayers make steadfast Thy faithful 
people, in that Thou art good and the Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Show forth thy ready protection, help and mercy * upon thy servants, O pure 
one; * dampen the waves of vain thoughts, * and raise up my fallen soul, O 
Theotokos, * for I know, O Virgin, I know, ** that thou canst do whatsoever 
thou dost will.  
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”  
The threefold waves of despair assail me who have fallen headlong into the 
depths of sin; but in that Thou art almighty, О Christ, Pilot of all, go Thou before 
me and in Thy tender compassion steer me to the calm harbor of dispassion, and 
save me by the prayers of the Forerunner, О Savior. 
Elizabeth was freed from barrenness, and the Virgin remained a virgin when 
she conceived in her womb at the sound of Gabriel’s voice. And the Forerunner 
John leapt up beforehand in his mother’s womb, perceiving in the womb of the 
Virgin the God and Master, Who became incarnate for our salvation. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O root that hath budded forth the divine flower, tabernacle and candlestick, 
golden vessel of manna, holy table bearing the bread of life: with John the 
Forerunner, intercede before Him, since He is thy son and God, that He may 
grant mercy and salvation to all who acknowledge thee to be the very Theotokos! 
ODE I 
Canon of repentance, the acrostic whereof is “O Christ, grant us cleansing of 
transgressions,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone V:  
Irmos: A land which the sun had never beheld, * and upon which it had 
never shined, * an abyss which the vault of heaven had not seen laid bare, * 
hath Israel traversed dry-shod, O Lord. * And Thou didst lead them to Thy 
mountain of sanctification, * as they sang and chanted * a hymn of victory. 
Grant me cleansing of the things I have done, О Savior, and absolve me 
before I depart from hence. Wash away my great filth, О Lord Who cleansed the 
lepers, and grant that I may stand blamelessly before Thee Who wilt come to 
judge the living and the dead. 
The discharge which lieth upon the eyes of my soul prevents me from gazing 
upon Thy beams, which Thou didst emit when Thou didst appear on earth, О 
unapproachable Sun. Wash it away, О Savior, and grant that I may contemplate 
the light of Thy grace, О compassionate Lord. 
To the martyrs: Full of vigilance, О blessed spiritual athletes, keepers of the 
commandments of Christ, ye lulled to sleep all the evil of the enemy; wherefore, in 
your divine vigilance raise me up to repentance, I pray, for I am weighed down by 
the sleep of sin. 
To the martyrs: Contending in your flesh against the adverse foe, О martyrs, 
ye vanquished him with the sword of the Cross and drowned him in the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
outpouring of your blood; and, singing and chanting a hymn of victory, ye have 
received from God crowns of victory. 
Theotokion: Deliver me from evil habits, О pure Virgin. Upon the rock of the 
commandments establish me who am shaken by the machinations of him who of 
old caused our first parents to fall. And grant that I may please Christ, singing well 
and chanting a hymn of victory. 
Another canon, of the holy forerunner, the acrostic whereof is “O Baptist, accept 
this entreaty,” the composition of Joseph, in Tone V:  
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
A pure and immaterial way of life didst thou show forth in a material body, О 
Forerunner; wherefore, we beseech thee: Make those who bless thee with faith 
emulators of thyself. 
O Forerunner who immersed Christ, the Abyss of compassion, in the river’s 
streams, entreat Him to dry up the abyss of mine evils and to enlighten my mind, I 
pray. 
O Forerunner of the Savior, mediating causes of repentance for me, I pray 
thee: Ask and entreat Him Who is the Lover of mankind, that I be granted the 
compunction which washeth away the fetid mire of sin. 
Theotokion: Without pain thou hast ineffably given birth unto Him Whom the 
Father incorruptibly begat before all ages, О all-hymned Lady. Him do thou 
beseech, that He save from all harm those who have recourse unto thee. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Do Thou establish my heart, O Lord, * which is shaken by the 
billows of life, * and guide it to a calm haven, O God. 
I promised Thee that I would repent, О God, yet still I commit sin. What will 
become of me? How shall I find myself when Thou shalt come to judge the earth? 
Let us offer supplication unto the Lord; let us sigh and shed the tears which 
wash away defilement, that we may find deliverance in the world to come. 
To the martyrs: Their minds wholly dead, the violators of the law wounded 
the victorious martyrs who love Life and confess Christ. 
To the martyrs: The choirs of the martyrs have been numbered with the choirs 
of the noetic angels; becoming peers of the angels through the grace of the divine 
Spirit. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Open now to me the gates of repentance, the portal of the Light, 
О Virgin; and forbid the passions entry into my humbled soul. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
Ever pouring forth healings upon those who approach thy temple with faith, 
О wondrous Forerunner, I pray thee: Cure the passions of my heart, which most 
wretchedly grows within me through negligence, О thou who art most noetically 
rich. 
I sigh and am ever wracked by lamentations when I think of Thine inexorable 
judgment, О only most-righteous Judge. By the supplications of Thy Forerunner, 
preserve me uncondemned there, О Lord my God. 
As the mediator between the Old and the New Covenants through thy divine 
mediations, О glorious Forerunner, I cry to thee: By repentance renew me who 
am grown old through many sins, that I may honor thee in praise. 
Theotokion: О holy Virgin Mother who alone art all-immaculate: Lift from us 
the blame of transgressions, enlighten our minds, purify our hearts, and deliver us 
all from everlasting condemnation, we pray. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: I have heard Thy report, O Lord, * and I was afraid. * I came to 
knowledge of Thy dispensation, * and I glorified Thee, O only Lover of 
mankind. 
Paying no heed to Thine enlightening words, О Lord, I have committed deeds 
of darkness, and I fear Thy dread tribunal in the life to come. 
If we give wings to the ship of our soul with the sail of the fear of God, we 
shall reach the havens of repentance, escaping the threefold waves of evils. 
To the martyrs: О martyrs, ye have been revealed to be divine mountains 
which let fall sweetness, and the divinely-planted garden having within it the Lord, 
the Tree of life. 
To the martyrs: With arrows of patience and perseverance ye shot down the 
demonic foe, and have received crowns of glory. 
Theotokion: О most pure Lady, intercessor for sinners, divine correction of 
those who have fallen, thou art glorified as she who gave birth to God. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
As a true warrior of Christ the King, thou hast made thine abode in the 
kingdom on high, O Baptist. Unceasingly entreat Him, that He have pity on those 
who honor thee. 
Foreseeing the gratefulness of thy heart, the Lord sanctified thee from thy 
mother’s womb, О blessed one. Him do thou entreat, that He sanctify us all, we 
pray. 
Thou didst announce the coming of Him Who died for our sake unto all the 
dead. Him do thou beseech, О Forerunner, that He give life to me who have died, 
and save me. 
Theotokion: Have mercy on me, О only most immaculate one, for thou hast 
ineffably given birth unto God Who is merciful in His surpassing goodness; and 
deliver me from everlasting torments. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Hasten Thou and have compassion on my wretched soul, * which 
doth battle at night * with the darkness of the passions. * Shine in me with 
the brightness of the day, * O noetic Sun, * and thereby make the night 
give way to light. 
There is no salvation for me in my works, for I have committed many sins on 
earth, wretch that I am, and I shall tremble before Thy dread judgment-seat when 
thou shalt judge those who have broken Thy commandments, О God. 
How mindless have I been! How dark I have become by doing evil deeds! 
How I have failed to understand the fear of Thee, О Christ! I have fallen face 
down upon the ground and made myself like the irrational beasts; yet grant me 
conversion, О God of all. 
To the martyrs: The cloud of martyrs hath dispelled the clouds of bitter 
torments, shining forth the daylight of true understanding, destroying the gloom 
of polytheism, and reaching the unapproachable Light. 
To the martyrs: Sanctify my mind by the supplications of Thy holy martyrs, I 
pray, О Christ, and show me to be full of enlightenment, and a partaker of 
everlasting glory, that, rendering glory, I may hymn Thee, О Savior. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: At the ineffable word thou hast given birth for us, О Virgin 
Mother, unto God Who through thy blessed mediations hath granted repentance 
unto all who have greatly sinned, О refuge and haven of the faithful. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
The womb of the barren one gave birth unto thee, О Forerunner, through thy 
right fruitful words showing forth as right fertile our hearts which are void of 
good works; wherefore, we call thee blessed. 
In the desert places thou didst blossom like a right fragrant lily, О ever-blessed 
one; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Drive all the fetor of evil from my soul, О 
Forerunner. 
Thou didst stand between the law and grace, О all-wise one; wherefore, I cry 
aloud: Have pity on me who am afflicted with wretchedness and am vanquished 
by the law of sin, О Forerunner. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, impassable portal of glory, open unto me the 
gates of repentance, winning for me divine entry and rest in the life to come. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Even as Thou didst deliver the prophet from the beast, O Lord, * so 
do Thou lead me up from the depths * of unrestrained passions, I pray 
Thee, * that I may dare * to look upon Thy holy temple. 
Now is the time to change our ways, yet I always lie prostrate, ever stuck in 
great senselessness. But releasing me from the darkness of my heart, О Word, 
have pity on me. 
Have pity on me who groan, as once Thou hadst pity on the publican, О 
compassionate Christ; and grant that I may weep fervent tears like the harlot, that 
I also may wash away the filth of my many transgressions 
To the martyrs: О great martyrs of Christ, from the great flame in Gehenna, 
which awaiteth me there, rescue me who have sinned greatly, that I may ever 
greatly glorify your memory. 
To the martyrs: Having struggled well, Thy passion-bearers were radiantly 
crowned by Thy life-creating right hand, О Lord and God. By their honored 
intercessions save all Thy people. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: О divinely joyous tabernacle of holiness, precious ark, lampstand 
of the divine Light, table of the Bread of life, animate palace of the Word: Show 
me to be a temple of the Spirit. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 
Resplendent with ineffable beams, О Forerunner of Christ, by thine effective 
supplications illumine the hearts of those who piously praise thee. 
О Forerunner of Christ, with grace illumining me, who am held fast in the 
sleep of slothfulness, assiduously rouse me to do those things which God willeth. 
From every tribulation caused by the adversary deliver us who have acquired 
thee as a divine intercessor and advocate before the Master, О blessed one. 
Theotokion: The tempest of sin assails me, О most pure Theotokos. Make 
haste to deliver me, guiding me to the haven of repentance, О all-immaculate one. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The prayer of the Children quenched the fire * and the furnace 
which bedewed them proclaimed the miracle, * for it neither burned nor 
consumed those, * who chanted hymns unto the God of our Fathers. 
Forgive Thou mine iniquities, mine injustices and my countless offenses, О 
Christ, and in the greatness of Thy compassions, О God, deliver me from the 
torment which is to come. 
Like the prodigal I have now squandered all the wealth I once received, and I 
am beset by starvation, deprived of divine food. Accept me, the penitent, О 
Savior, and save me. 
To the martyrs: Your members mortified by many tortures, ye rendered dead 
the warring foe, О right wondrous martyrs of the Lord; wherefore, we the faithful 
piously hymn you. 
To the martyrs: О martyrs, with patience and valor ye impaled hordes of the 
demons and all the multitude of tormentors, and have now been transported to 
true Life. 
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be a haven of salvation for all, О pure 
one, stilling the tempest of the passions and leading to tranquility all who are 
humble on the earth, О pure Birthgiver of God. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
With words we entreat thee who art the Forerunner of the Word: As thou 
didst loose the voice of thy father at thy birth, so loose thou the snares of our 
transgressions. 
O all-radiant sun who shinest the radiance of salvation upon me, deliver me 
from the darkness of the passions which vex my darkened heart. 
I have acquired an unfruitful soul and a barren heart, О divine offspring of the 
barren woman. О Baptist of Christ, pray thou without ceasing, that I may produce 
the fruits of repentance. 
Triadicon: Let us glorify the Son Who is equal to the Father, and the Holy 
Spirit, the indivisible Trinity, chanting in a godly manner: О God, blessed art 
Thou! 
Theotokion: О all-immaculate one, thou hast given birth to Christ as a little 
Child, Who worketh the renewal of us who have grown old through the ancient 
transgression. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O ye company of angels, * and assembly of mankind; * ye priests, 
Levites, and peoples: * praise, bless, and supremely exalt the King and 
Creator of all, * throughout all ages. 
Behold, the sores of my soul have putrefied and grown fetid, О Christ, and I 
have suffered and been humbled thereby; but treat me, О Savior, with the 
medicines of repentance. 
By deception the most wicked serpent defrauded me and filled me with evils; 
but, sighing, I cry: О Word, reject me not, who am condemned and brought low! 
To the martyrs: Ye turned not away from a higher standing, О all-famed ones, 
and ye cast down the enemies of the Cross who sought to undermine you, utterly 
vanquishing them, О most wise ones. 
To the martyrs: О all-praised martyrs of the Lord, neither fire, nor the sword, 
nor wild beasts, nor starvation, nor the crushing wheel, nor any other torture was 
able to separate you from Christ the Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: О Mother of God, boast of angels and salvation of all, be thou a 
surety for me, that I may find and receive remission of the sins I have committed 
in the past, in knowledge and in ignorance. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Thou didst wash the assembly of the people in the streams of the Jordan, 
preaching repentance, О great Forerunner; wherefore, I cry out to thee: Dry up 
the stream of my passions, sending forth wellsprings of tears upon me. 
Be thou wholly atremble, О my soul, pondering the judgment-seat of the 
Almighty; and cry aloud: О Compassionate One, for the sake of Thy Forerunner 
have pity and save me, and deliver me from torments. 
I move mine unclean lips and defiled tongue in prayer to thee, О holy 
Forerunner: Hasten thou quickly, and help me, who am unceasingly shaken by all 
the assaults of the deceiver. 
Triadicon: О consubstantial Trinity - Father, Son and Spirit - rain down upon 
us remission offenses, that, having received perfect salvation, we may supremely 
exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Theotokion: О divinely joyous one, by thine exalted birthgiving thou hast 
raised us up from the pit into which we have fallen; wherefore, with grateful 
voices, О maiden, we hymn thee with faith throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: For the mighty One hath done great things to thee, * in that He 
showed thee forth as a pure Virgin * even after giving birth, * since thou art 
she that hath seedlessly borne her own creator, * wherefore, O Theotokos, 
* we magnify thee. 
That I may magnify Thy long-suffering, I cry to Thee: О Jesus, be Thou yet 
patient with me, and hew me not down like the barren fig tree, but let me produce 
for Thee the fruits of repentance. 
How awesome art Thou, О Thou Who alone art mighty and powerful! Who 
will withstand the dread threat of Thee when Thou Thyself shalt come to sit in 
judgment? When that shall take Thy place, preserve me uncondemned. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
To the martyrs: By your divine pangs ye take away the pains of my body, О 
spiritual athletes of the Lord; wherefore, heal the most grievous passions of my 
soul, in that ye are most skilled physicians. 
To the martyrs: The shrines of your relics shine forth more brightly than the 
rays of the sun with rays of divine grace, enlightening hearts and illumining the 
souls of those who praise you with faith, О passion-bearers. 
Theotokion: О thou who art full of the grace of God, thou hast truly been 
revealed to be the radiant cloud which leadeth the new people to the promised 
land, and the gate which leadeth to life; wherefore, we magnify thee, О 
Theotokos. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
Lo! the majesty of thy temple is acknowledged to be heaven on earth, О 
Forerunner of Christ, and with divine rays thou enlightenest those who approach 
it and who now bless thee therein every day. 
As the true friend of the Master, О all-blessed Baptist, strengthen me to love 
Him without wavering, and with an upright character, and to spurn the corrupting 
passions which lead me into the pit of perdition. 
Thou wast not a reed shaken by contrary winds, О most wise one, but rather 
our divine confirmation and the unshakable fortification of the Church, which do 
thou preserve unshaken by thy supplications, causing every temptation to cease. 
The coming of the Creator is at hand! Why, therefore, dost thou not weep 
over thyself, О my wretched soul - living in indifference. But arise, and cry out to 
the Lord: Have pity on me, О Savior, through the supplications of the Fore-
runner, in that Thou lovest mankind! 
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the radiant chariot of the Sun Who 
shone forth from thy womb and broke the cruel darkness of delusion, О all- 
immaculate and pure one. Wherefore, with faith we bless thee as is meet. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone V: 
Turn away from the multitude of my transgressions O Lord, Who wast born 
of the Virgin, and cleanse me of all my sins. I beseech Thee to grant me the 
thought of turning back unto Thee, for Thou alone lovest mankind, and have 
mercy upon me.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Woe is me, to whom am I like? I am like the barren fig tree, and I fear that I 
shall be cursed and cut down. But, do Thou O heavenly Husbandman, make my 
barren soul fruitful, O Christ God, and receive me as the Prodigal Son, and have 
mercy upon me. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Thy passion-bearers, О Lord, emulators of the angelic ranks, 
endured tortures as though bodiless, and in oneness of mind possessed the hope 
of enjoyment of the good things promised them. By their prayers, О Christ God, 
grant peace to Thy world and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou who art full of grace, * intercede by thy supplications, * and beg that a 
multitude of compassions be granted to our souls * and the cleansing of our many 
sins, ** we entreat thee.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE V  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone V:  
Believing Thee to be God, the thief on the cross confessed Thee, О Christ, 
crying out in purity from the depths of his heart: Remember me, О Lord, in Thy 
kingdom! 
As Thou didst justify the harlot who wept from the depths of her soul, О 
Christ, so do Thou rescue me from all torment, for I am in despair, О good 
Master, I entreat Thee. 
Together let us bless John, who went before Christ and prepared His goodly 
ways, that through his divine supplications we may be delivered from 
transgressions. 
To the martyrs: О holy martyrs, who drained the cup of Christ with a fervent 
soul: With the downpour of your divine prayers deliver us from turbid sins and 
ailments. 
Glory ..., О unapproachable God, almighty Trinity and Unity: By the 
supplications of Thy Forerunner save me, delivering me from darkness and the 
flame which awaiteth me. 
Both now ..., Ever defiled by wicked acts, I beseech thee, the undefiled Mother 
of the Master: Cleanse me of all defilement, О Lady! 
 
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
  
