--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE V  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Traversing all the earth, ye sowed divine teachings, bearing the Word alone as 
a lamp and all riches, О disciples of the Lord; and thereby ye put emperors and 
torturers to shame, and rent asunder the vain arguments of the philosophers and 
rhetors as though they were spiders’ webs, calling all to recognize the Creator, and 
abolishing the vain worship of demons. Wherefore, I pray that, by your prayers, ye 
deliver me from those who are irrational. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
By your supplications unto God, deliver us all from the turmoil of 
temptations, the cruel deception of shameful heresies, the evil counsel of the 
demons, the fire which burneth in the absence of light, the everlasting worm, the 
gnashing of teeth, and all other torments; and beseech Him that, for the sake of 
your temperance and toils, we may receive the reward of the virtues, the 
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, and great mercy. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Clearly receiving all the effulgence, and the reflected light of the ineffable 
dispensation of the Trinity, insofar as human nature can so do, the all-praised 
twelve perfectly manifested themselves, bringing with them the seventy-two, and 
enlightening the ends of the world, darkened by the darkness of wicked heresy, 
pray ye unto Christ that He grant the world great mercy. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in the same Melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is plenteous redemption, * and He shall 
redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Rejoice, О sacred one, pure habitation of the virtues, godly standard of a 
blameless priesthood, great and manifest pastor, whose radiant name signifies 
victory, who mercifully heeds those who make supplication, inclining thine ear to 
the pleas of the infirm, ready deliverer, saving refuge for all who with faith ever 
honor thy glorious memory! Entreat Christ, that He send down upon us great 
mercy. 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Rejoice, О holy hierarch Nicholas, most sacred mind, pure abode of the 
Trinity, pillar of the Church, confirmation of the faithful, helper of the afflicted, 
star who with the brilliant rays of thy right acceptable prayers dost ever dispel the 
darkness of trial and tribulation, calm haven whereto the imperiled who flee are 
saved from the threefold waves of life! Entreat Christ God, that He send down 
upon our souls great mercy. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Rejoice, standard for hierarchs, inexhaustible depths of divine wonders, beauty 
of the Church, brilliant star who with thy sacred effulgence dost shed light upon 
each of us, O blessed and most holy one who art illumined with most radiant 
flashes of lightning, unshakable tower, stairway of faith for those who with love 
keep thine honored memory: Entreat Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O strange, awesome and great mystery! * The Un-circumscribable One hath 
made His abode within a womb, * and a Mother remaineth a Virgin even after 
birthgiving, * for from her she gave birth to God Incarnate. * To Him, then, let us 
cry aloud, * to Him let us raise a hymn, * chanting with the angels: * Holy art 
Thou, O Christ God, * Who wast incarnate for our sake! ** Glory be to Thee!  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone V: 
As eye-witnesses to the mysteries of the Savior, О disciples, ye preached the 
Invisible One Who hath no beginning, saying: In the beginning was the Word. Ye 
were not created before the angels, nor were ye taught of men, but by the wisdom 
of the Most High. Wherefore, as ye have boldness, pray ye on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Together let us praise the apostles of the Lord with hymns, for, having arrayed 
themselves in the armor of the Cross, they abolished the delusion of the demons 
and were revealed to be crowned victors. By the supplications of them and all the 
saints, О God, have mercy on us. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Your souls filled with insatiable love, О holy martyrs, ye did 
not deny Christ; and enduring the divers wounds of sufferings, ye cast down the 
audacity of the tormentors; and having preserved the Faith intact and unharmed, 
ye were translated to the heavens. Wherefore, as ye have boldness before Him, ask 
that He grant us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is 
meet, * thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast intercession 
and refuge of our souls.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE V 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior * Who made His people pass dryshod through 
the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us 
sing: * For He hath been glorified. 
О radiant tabernacle of Christ the King, illumine my mind, which hath been 
darkened by the deceit of the enemy and blinded by the darkness of my 
transgressions. 
О Birthgiver of God, free my humbled soul from wicked thoughts, and make 
it a dwelling-place for God, that I may ever glorify thee as is meet. 
Glory ..., When I must needs depart from this transitory life at the command 
of God, О most pure one, show me to elude the hands of the demons, providing 
me angels as companions. 
Both now ..., Why hast thou wasted all thy life in great despondency, О my 
soul? Wherefore, hasten thou and cry out to the Mother of the Lord: Cleanse thou 
and save me, О Birthgiver of God! 
ODE III 
Irmos: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast 
mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify Thine arising on the 
third day.  
Out of the pit of torments and sufferings do thou lead me up who hymn thee 
constantly, О all-blessed Theotokos. 
Rend asunder the rags of my boundless transgressions, and gird me about with 
the gladness of the virtues, О thou who art full of the grace of God. 
Glory ..., Grant me tear-drops, О pure one, that I may dispel the perplexity of 
my heart and may hymn thee earnestly. 
Both now ..., Cast down the arrogance of the incorporeal foe, О most 
immaculate one, and quickly free me from their tyranny. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report of the mighty deed * of Thy Cross, O Lord, * 
how Paradise was opened thereby, and I cried: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Why hast thou likened thyself to the barren fig-tree, О my soul, in nowise 
afraid of being cut down and cast into everlasting flames? Hasten thou, therefore, 
and rouse thyself before it is too late. 
What tongue can describe the boundless sea of the evils I have committed and 
the abyss of my transgressions? Save me, who am in despair, О most immaculate 
Virgin! 
Glory ..., I weep for myself when I bring to mind my manifold transgressions 
and the fire which will never be quenched, and I entreat thee: Grant me time for 
repentance, О pure one. 
Both now ..., Let not the enemy seize my wretched soul like a savage lion, but 
by thy power break his soul-destroying fangs, О good one. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou 
art our God; * we know none other besides Thee.  
Look down and hearken to my voice, О Lady; and deliver me from everlasting 
condemnation, I pray. 
I have been wounded by the arrows of sin, and I cry to thee: Heal the wounds 
of my heart, О most pure one! 
Glory ..., Have mercy on me, О only Compassionate One Who lovest 
mankind, through the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee; for Thou art 
my God and Lord. 
Both now ..., I entreat thy goodness, be compassionate to me О thou who 
alone art all-hymned; and grant me mercy. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become 
my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and Thy right 
hand saved me, O Lord.  
Like a lion, the deceitful one seeketh after me to devour me, wickedly showing 
forth his gaping jaws, but from such do thou rescue me.  
Do Thou cleanse me O Lover of mankind, and by the pure prayers of her who 
gave birth to thee, deliver Thy world from every manner of suffering, and grant 
me everlasting glory. 
Glory ..., A multitude of transgressions hath encompassed me, and I have 
fallen into the depths of despair. I pray thee O pure one, lead me up from the 
deepest depths of Hades, that I may glorify thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., My life hath been filled with transgressions and all manner of 
slothfulness; wherefore, before mine end, О pure one, turn me back to repentance 
and save me, О all-hymned one. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
Rejoice, О firm rampart of divine victory! Rejoice, most militant felling of 
barbarians! Rejoice, О Theotokos, thou triumph of faithful Orthodox Christians, 
who truly set their hope on thee, delivering us from all misfortunes and ungodly 
enemies by thy supplications! 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
By thy goodness, О Lady, grant me forgiveness of evils, voluntary or 
involuntary. 
My mind is weakened by the assaults of wicked thoughts of ungodliness. Help 
me, О good one. 
Glory ..., О Theotokos, with the remedy of thine entreaties heal now the 
wounds of the passions of my soul. 
Both now ..., Grant me a contrite soul and humble mind, О good one, that I 
may glorify thee. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father * hath 
in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O ye priests 
hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Having lived my life in slothfulness, wretch that I am, and drawn nigh to the 
end of my life, I cry out to thee O Theotokos: Preserve my lowly soul from the 
snares of the adversary. 
Grant unto me healing of bodily ailments, spiritual wounds, and deliverance 
from besetting passions by thy divine power, since thou alone art compassionate. 
Glory ..., Engulfed by the tempest of life, and covered over by the waves of 
demonic temptations, do thou save me O pure maiden, leading me to a God-
pleasing life of godly struggles.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., Like a herald entering a bridal chamber, Gabriel cried out, saying: 
Rejoice, О Virgin, thou most glorious palace of Christ, the King of all, wherein 
dwelling He hath deified all mortals! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Thee the true Mother of God, * who above all understanding * and 
beyond all description, * ineffably brought forth in time * the Eternal One, 
* with one mind do we the faithful magnify. 
Thee, who hast ineffably given birth to God, have we acquired as an ally, an 
immovable rampart, the salvation of our souls, and a wellspring of miracles. 
On the day of judgment be Thou merciful to me, О Word of the true God, by 
the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, and number me with those who 
are on Thy right hand. 
Glory ..., Deliver me from everlasting fire, from the worm which sleepeth not 
and from all manner of torment, for I have placed my hope in thee. 
Both now ..., When my soul shall be separated from my wretched body, О 
Bride of God, deliver me from the tyranny of the invisible foe. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE V 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone V: 
With spiritual songs and hymns let all of us on earth praise the most wise 
apostles as eyewitnesses and servants of the Word; for they earnestly entreat 
Christ on behalf of us who hymn their sacred memory and bow down before their 
relics. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
Together let us praise the apostles as eye-witnesses of the Word, divine 
preachers, spiritual fishers of the nations, for they have clearly brought us to an 
understanding of Christ; and having delivered the race of mankind from delusion, 
they have granted us the kingdom. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
I am condemned by the court of my conscience, and considering my plea 
before I am brought to trial, I tremble, wretch that I am, remembering the 
multitude of mine evils. Yet unto thee, who art mine invincible intercessor and 
protection, do I cry out with compunction: Deliver me from that shame, and save 
me by thy prayers! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V: 
Together let us praise the apostles, for they preached the Orthodox doctrine 
of the Lord unto all, dispelling the gloom of heresies and shining forth in the 
world the light of the Spirit through the teaching of grace; and they pray that we 
be saved. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
Together let us praise the apostles ..., 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: The hosts of heaven exceedingly marveled at the corrections 
of the holy martyrs; how, fighting the good fight in their mortal bodies, they 
invisibly vanquished the incorporeal foe with the power of the Cross; and they 
pray unto the Lord, that our souls find mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Finding thee to be a haven, a bulwark, a refuge, our hope, protection and 
fervent help, we, the faithful, hasten to thee and cry out earnestly, exclaiming with 
faith: Have mercy upon those who place their trust in thee, O Theotokos, and 
deliver us from transgressions.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V: 
О disciples of the Savior, divine apostles, who sowed the word of salvation 
unto the ends of all the earth, and illumined those sitting in darkness and shadow: 
By your supplications, О all-praised ones, enlighten my soul, which hath been 
darkened by the darkness of the passions. 
Preaching the ineffable mystery of Thine incarnation, О Lord, illiterate men 
put philosophers to shame; fishermen shut the mouths of rhetors. And they 
became most wise teachers of the nations, illumining the ends of the earth with 
the light of divine understanding. Through them grant us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We who have thee as our unashamed hope, О Virgin who art our protection, 
free us from divers perils, evil circumstances and grievous tribulations, and with 
His apostles beseech thy Son, that He save all who hymn thee. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy apostles, the composition of Theophanes, Bishop of Nicea, in 
Tone V:  
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
Enriched by the effulgence of Him Who first bestowed the gift of light, and 
Who deigned to converse with men in the flesh, О glorious and divine apostles, 
release my soul from all darkness. (Twice) 
Having been drawn, the divine Bow loosed you like arrows upon the whole 
world, О apostles, breaking all the arrows of the wicked and crafty one, and 
healing the wounds of the faithful. 
Possessed of the very wisdom of the Teacher, О apostles, ye made wise all the 
ends of the earth; wherefore, make me wise, that I may fend off every wicked 
scheme of the enemy. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, who alone art blessed and full of divine joy, 
having filled the race of mankind with joy by thy blessings, with the divine 
apostles entreat Christ, that we find mercy. 
Another canon, of the holy hierarch Nicholas, the acrostic whereof is “I 
offer a fifth hymn unto thee, О Nicholas,” the composition of Joseph, in 
Tone V: 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Uniting thyself unto God by faith and love, О father, thou didst fulfill His all-
holy desires, and thereby didst become holy in all things, О wise and holy hierarch 
Nicholas. 
Having thee as an intercessor before the Compassionate One, we who are 
beset by perils and griefs flee unto thee. Grant thou a saving hand, delivering us 
from all difficulties. 
Christ anointed thee for the people of Myra as a holy hierarch who filleth us 
with the sweet fragrance of miracles; wherefore, we beseech thee, О Nicholas, to 
deliver us from the foul stench of sin. 
Theotokion: Of old, the choir of the prophets foretold thee to be the divine 
mountain and impassable portal, О Virgin. Wherefore О maiden, we pray thee: 
Open unto us the divine gates of repentance. 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
He Who is exceeding great in goodness, and beggared Himself by assuming 
flesh, enriched you with all manner of gifts, О glorious apostles, who became 
poor for His sake and have enriched the ends of the earth with divine and 
honorable understandings. (Twice) 
I have sustained the venomous bite of the serpent, and my heart hath been 
wounded; wherefore, I cry out to Thee, О Christ, Who wast wounded for my 
sake: By the prayers of Thine apostles heal and save me, I pray! 
Having drawn me forth from the depths of the evil adversary, from the 
threefold waves of wicked thoughts, and from deadly passions, with the net of 
your prayers, О all-blessed ones, bring me, saved, unto the God of all. 
Theotokion: О thou who received the Rain of heaven, with the apostles 
entreat Him to cause the torrents of my passions to cease their flow, drying up my 
sin, and to save me who glorify thee in a pure manner. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
With the opposition of thy divine labors, О venerable one, thou didst break 
the arrows of the evil one. And by thy supplications, О most wise one, preserve 
thou, unharmed by his malice and violence, those who hymn thee, О great 
Nicholas. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Having shown forth an angelic life on earth, thou now ever standest with the 
angels before the throne of the Trinity, О sacred one, asking remission of our 
offenses and temptations, О father and chief hierarch Nicholas. 
By thy luminous supplications drive away all darkness from my mind, О 
Nicholas; still the tempest of my passions, О father, and steer me to the harbor of 
dispassion, I pray, that I may glorify thee in praise. 
Theotokion: Standing at the right hand of Christ as a Queen truly arrayed in 
golden vesture, О all-immaculate and divinely joyous maiden, by thy prayers win 
for us the kingdom of heaven. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
As the Door, Jesus, our God and Lord, opened to the apostles the 
understanding of Him, and through their teachings opened the door to all the 
nations. (Twice) 
О Son of God, by fellowship Thou didst reveal the apostles to be sons of the 
heavenly Father. Through their entreaty make us all children of the light. 
О apostles who will most gloriously be seated on twelve thrones with the 
Judge and King, deliver me from the awesome and dread trial. 
Theotokion: О ark of divine sanctity, hallow my soul and enlighten my mind, 
ever praying to Christ with the apostles, that He save me. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Thou didst exchange fleeting things for things yet to come, О Nicholas. By thy 
prayers cause us also to share therein, delivering us from every temptation of life. 
As first hierarch of the people of Myra, О holy Nicholas, perfume with myrrh 
all the senses of my heart, and by thy prayers ever drive from it the fetid passions. 
Foil all the enemy’s wiles, visible and invisible, О Nicholas, and send to never-
ending perdition our foes, who ever wage war upon us. 
Theotokion: О holy Theotokos, save me who am constantly drowning in 
carnal pleasures and lie, ever groaning, upon my bed of despair. 
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
In the upper room, the rhetors of the Spirit, the honored apostles, beheld the 
Holy Spirit Who came upon them in the form of fire, receiving Him in an 
awesome manner. (Twice) 
О apostles, ye who have crushed ungodliness, with the dew of healing heal my 
mind, which hath been crushed by transgressions. 
О apostles, Christ sent you forth like choice arrows, breaking the arrows of 
wickedness; wherefore, heal me who have been wounded by the arrows of the 
enemy. 
Theotokion: “Condemn me not, neither turn Thy face away from me, О 
greatly Merciful One!”, for the council of the apostles and she who gave birth to 
Thee entreat Thee in a pure manner. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Thou didst break asunder the graven idols and show the counsels of the 
heretics to be impotent, О holy Nicholas, and didst deliver those sentenced to 
death. 
Having risen early unto the Lord from childhood, О venerable one, thou wast 
wholly enlightened by the heavenly radiance; wherefore pray thou that cloudiness 
be driven from my soul. 
We beseech thee, О father Nicholas: At the dread hour be thou among all who 
call upon thee, and grant us our petitions which are conducive to salvation. 
Theotokion: He Who is inaccessible to the mind of man, as one mortal took 
thee as His possession, delivering all from besetting tribulations. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 
With the salt of the teaching of Thy sacred disciples Thou didst put an end to 
the corruption of evil for the souls of the nations, О Lover of mankind. (Twice) 
Thou knowest the depths of mine evils, О Master Christ. Grant me Thy hand, 
and by the supplications of Thy sacred apostles save me, О Lover of mankind. 
О most righteous Judge, on the dread day of judgment deliver me, who 
tremble, from condemnation, by the supplications of Thy right glorious apostles. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: From the multitude of mine iniquities grant salvation unto me 
who am desperate, by the supplications of Thy disciples and Thy Mother. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
By thy supplications render the Master merciful unto all who honor thee, О 
Nicholas, that He may grant us remission of our sins. 
Deliver from infirmities and the temptations of life, from perils and 
tribulations, those who have acquired thee as an advocate before the Lord, О 
Nicholas. 
Christ the Master hath shown thee to be an excellent physician; wherefore, 
heal thou the infirmities of those who approach thee in piety, O Nicholas. 
Theotokion: Thou wast a mother who knew no husband, О pure Mother of 
God; wherefore, I pray thee with faith: Dispel the despondency of my soul. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers exceedingly exalted you, О 
disciples of Christ who beheld God, casting down all the power of the enemy. 
(Twice) 
With streams of compunction and your supplications, О apostles, wash away 
the defilement of my heart, teaching me to cry: О God, blessed art Thou! 
With the fire of the divine Spirit ye burned up the tinder of all vanity; 
wherefore, deliver me from burning Gehenna, О disciples of God the Word. 
Theotokion: О Virgin who set aright the fall of Adam, by your prayers and 
those of the divine apostles, raise me up who have fallen into the precipice of evil. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Having relied wholly on God, О divinely wise Nicholas, wholly save me who 
am ever wretchedly tripped by the passions of life. 
О divinely radiant lamp, illumine my mind which is ever darkened by the 
gloom of the passions, and grant that I may walk nobly in this life. 
Every wicked mouth which is opened against me do thou shut by thy prayers, 
О Nicholas, delivering me from enemies, visible and invisible. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: From thee, О all-radiant cloud, did Christ our God, the never-
setting Sun, shine forth upon us, illumining those in the darkness of ignorance, О 
Theotokos. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
О Word, Thou didst send forth Thine apostles as noetic clouds which let fall 
upon us the rain of most wise and divine teachings, giving us drink throughout all 
ages. (Twice) 
О beholders of God, pillars of the Church all-adorned, surrounding it with the 
teachings of the Faith: with divine skill make steadfast the defiled house of my 
soul. 
Groan thou, О my soul, and offer unto the Lord torrents of tears from the 
depths of thy heart, crying aloud: О only Compassionate One, save and purify me 
through the right acceptable prayers of the all-glorious apostles. 
Theotokion: О most pure Virgin, chosen Sion, city of the King: make me a 
citizen of the city on high, entreating Thy timeless Son with the divine disciples. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О Nicholas, who wast a great hierarch in Myra, perfume the senses of my soul 
with myrrh, that I may escape the stench of the passions and receive the grace of 
the Comforter. 
With streams pouring forth from thy holy tongue, О most wise one, thou didst 
stop the streams of the blasphemy of Arius; wherefore, we cry out to thee: By thy 
supplications dry up the streams of my passions, О all-blessed Nicholas! 
By thy supplications deliver us from our offenses, from the oppression of the 
demons, foreign captivity, and the most evil and wicked harm caused by men, that 
we may praise thee, our deliverer. 
Triadicon: Unceasingly glorifying with faith the monarchy of the Trinity, we 
cry out: О Father, Word and all-holy Spirit, we hymn Thee throughout all ages! 
Theotokion: Having clad Himself in flesh taken from thee for our sake, О 
Virgin, God showed thee, the pure and all-immaculate one, to be the divine 
intercessor for the whole race of mankind; wherefore, we, the faithful, hymn thee 
aloud. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
By the splendors of divine virtues ye were noetically revealed to be starry skies, 
having Christ, the Sun, in your midst; and ye have renewed the ends of the earth, 
О most wise ones; wherefore, we call you blessed. (Twice) 
Bearing the wounds of Christ upon your divine bodies like an all-magnificent 
armor, О most wise ones, by your mediations before the Lord heal my soul, which 
hath been wounded by the darts of the demons. 
In that Thou raised up Lazarus, О Christ, Lord and Word, by Thy disciples 
save me who lie in the uttermost abyss of sin, having weighed down my soul with 
the sleep of grievous slothfulness. 
Theotokion: Direct the steps of my soul straight to the paths of Thine 
unerring commandments, О Word of God, having the most pure Virgin who gave 
birth to Thee praying to Thee with Thy most wise apostles, О greatly Merciful 
One. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
As a divine and holy hierarch thou didst keep all the commandments of Christ; 
wherefore, thou wast the godly preserver of the faithful. О father Nicholas, 
preserve them from all perils and afflictions. 
As a good shepherd thou didst feed thy city, which was starving in hunger, so 
now feed my soul with the bread of understanding, О father Nicholas, for I have 
acquired thee as a good helper. 
О venerable pastor, with faith we entreat thee, the great sun which ever riseth 
above the Church of Christ: With radiant beams of light drive away the deep 
gloom of sins from our souls. 
The dread day of the coming of Christ draweth nigh, as it is written. Rouse 
thyself, О my soul, and cast off slothfulness, and cry aloud to Christ: Save me, О 
Lord, by the prayers of Thy servant Nicholas! 
Theotokion: О most pure one, the prophet foresaw thee as the radiant 
lampstand bearing Christ, the noetic Lamp, by Whom those who lie in darkness 
and the passions have been enlightened, wherefore we call thee blessed, О Ever-
virgin Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone V: 
As eye-witnesses to the mysteries of the Savior, О disciples, ye preached the 
Invisible One Who hath no beginning, saying: In the beginning was the Word. Ye 
were not created before the angels, nor were ye taught of men, but by the wisdom 
of the Most High. Wherefore, as ye have boldness, pray ye on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Together let us praise the apostles of the Lord with hymns, for, having arrayed 
themselves in the armor of the Cross, they abolished the delusion of the demons 
and were shown to be crowned victors. By the supplications of them and all the 
saints, О God, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Rejoicing in the midst of their torments, the saints cried out: 
“These things are goods with which we trade with the Lord: for, instead of the 
wounds we bear on our bodies, radiant vesture shall blossom forth for us unto 
our resurrection; instead of dishonor, we shall receive crowns; instead of fetters in 
prison, we shall receive paradise; and instead of condemnation with malefactors, 
we shall have life with the angels!” By their supplications, О Lord, save Thou our 
souls! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * for from thee hath shone forth Christ, 
the Sun of righteousness, ** Who hath great mercy.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE V 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone V:  
Believing Thee to be God, the thief on the cross confessed Thee, О Christ, 
crying out in purity from the depths of his heart: Remember me, О Lord, in Thy 
kingdom! 
Like radiant clouds ye traversed the earth, О divine disciples, letting fall the 
water of life; and ye give drink in abundance to hearts withering away through 
transgressions. 
As mystic rays of the Sun Who shone forth from the pure Virgin, О divine 
disciples of Christ our God, ye have enlightened those who sit in the darkness of 
ignorance. 
That Thou mightest recover the coin buried in the abyss of transgressions, О 
Christ, and bring it to the Father, through the divine Spirit Thou didst ordain the 
apostles as preachers. 
To the martyrs: Enduring the burning of cruel tortures, О most wise ones, ye 
burned up the falsehood of the idols and have passed over to divine consolation, 
О saints. 
Glory ..., О supremely divine Trinity, single Godhead - beginningless Father, 
Son Who art equally without beginning, and Holy Spirit - Preserve Thy Church 
through the supplications of all who preach Thee! 
Both now ..., О divinely joyous one, adornment of the apostles: With rays of 
repentance enlighten me who am darkened by the pleasures of life, that I may 
magnify thee. 
 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
