--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY EVENING: TONE V 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “O venerable father ...”:  
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Let all the groves of trees rejoice, beholding the most precious Tree which was 
made joyous by the suffering of the Master, shining forth grace like a flame of fire, 
pouring forth gifts upon all like water, and enlightening the thoughts of our souls, 
washing away infirmities and driving away invisible passions, and manifestly 
vanquishing foreign nations, ever granting to the faithful victories, blessing and 
great mercy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Worshipping with faith the place where the feet of the Lord stood, as the 
prophet said, let us glorify Christ Who was crucified, and with Himself crucified 
our transgressions, Who abolished the curse which originated with a tree, and 
reconciled with the Father those who had withdrawn far from Him through evil 
thoughts; and venerating the nails of his hands and feet, the spear and the reed, 
the sponge and the crown of thorns, and the insults and mockery, and all else He 
endured, let us venerate them with honor, for by them we are saved. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Let us crucify all our members with Christ, and let us die unto the world; and 
desiring to walk in the footsteps of Christ, the Ruler of this world, let us take His 
divine Cross upon our shoulder by rejecting the uprisings of the flesh and the evil 
lusts which draw our souls into sin, thinking to stand before Him and to behold 
Him nailed to the Cross, breathing His last and surrendering His soul into the 
hands of the Father, that we may never be separated from Him. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
When thou didst behold hanging upon the Tree, the planted Cluster of grapes 
Whom, like a vine, thou didst bring forth, with His divine side pierced by a spear, 
thou didst exclaim crying aloud O most pure one: “What is this, O my Son and 

--- PAGE 2 ---
God? How is it that Thou Who dost heal all infirmities and sufferings, hath 
undergone suffering, though Thou art dispassionate according to Thy divine 
nature? How have the thankless people thus rewarded Thee for Thy benefactions, 
O Benefactor?”. By His sufferings pray thou that I may ever be free from 
sufferings, that I may glorify thee.  
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Let us all weep and lift up our hands, beating our breast, shedding fervent 
tears, bending our knees, earnestly smiting our foreheads on the ground; and let us 
who have angered God by unseemly deeds and the rejection of His com-
mandments send sighs on high, crying out: By the supplications of Thy Mother, 
deliver from all torment at the coming judgment those who have grieved Thee but 
have converted, for whom, incarnate, Thou didst endure the Cross; and grant 
them a share in Thy kingdom. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Unto whom hast thou likened thyself, О my soul, ever prospering in bitter 
works, and mindlessly adding so many stripes to thy wounds that thou art covered 
with sores, giving no thought to the approach of the Judge, before Whom thou 
must needs stand to receive retribution for thy guilt according to thy deeds? But 
turning, fall down before the Virgin, crying out: О Lady, О Lady, disdain me not 
who have angered the right merciful God Who was born from thee for the 
salvation of all, and was crucified in the flesh! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Desiring that all receive salvation, O my sinless Christ, 
Thou wast pleased to pay a great price, Thy precious blood, for our deliverance. 
Wherefore, beholding Thee nailed, Thy Mother, lamenting, rent her hair, saying: 
“O Child, mine all-immaculate Lamb, Who desirest to deliver the world by Thy 
precious blood, how hast Thou set to whence I cannot see, O never-setting Sun, 
Who grantest unto all enlightenment, peace and great mercy?”  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
О Lord, of old, in the time of Moses the prophet, the image of Thy Cross, 
having been precisely revealed, vanquished Thine enemies; and now, possessed of 
that same Cross, we ask Thy help: Strengthen Thy Church, for the sake of Thy 
great mercy, О Lover of mankind! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Though a tree visible by nature, Thy Cross, О Christ, is invested with divine 
power; and being tangibly revealed to the world, it wondrously and noetically 
worketh our salvation. Bowing down before it, we glorify Thee, О Savior. Have 
mercy on us! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Despising all the things of earth, and manfully braving 
tortures, ye did not fail to attain your divine hopes, but became heirs to the 
kingdom of heaven, О all-famed martyrs. And as ye have boldness before God 
Who is the Lover of mankind, ask peace for the world and great mercy for our 
souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Of old, the Virgin Mother, the all-blessed maiden, beholding 
the Lamb, her Son, lifted up upon the Cross, cried out, weeping: ''Woe is me, O 
my Son! How is it that Thou diest Who art in essence God immortal?”  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
THURSDAY NIGHT: TONE V 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
We know thee to be another, noetic garden of paradise, О Virgin Bride of 
God, beyond compare surpassing the Garden of Eden, О Mother of God; for 
thou hast budded forth incorruption for mankind. 
In paradise Adam was hindered from touching the tree of life, having partaken 
of the fruit of knowledge; but the Fruit received from thee hath given him 
immortality. 
Glory ..., Adam was the first man created from earth by the most pure hands 
of the Almighty; but thou, О Virgin Theotokos, hast given birth without seed to 
the new Adam, the Creator of mankind. 
Both now ..., The uttermost abyss of boundless transgressions hath engulfed 
me, and led me down into the depths of grievous despondency. О thou who hast 
given birth to the Abyss of loving-kindness, hasten thou and save me! 
ODE III 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
О immutable Word of God, Who didst make the earth the mother of living 
plants which did not exist on it in the beginning: Thou hast straightway come 
forth, seedlessly incarnate, from the woman who knew not a man, as from the 
earth. 
Thou art the hope and help, the joy, protection and refuge of mortals, О Lady 
and Mother of life; wherefore, we pray: Send down thine aid upon all who hymn 
thee. 
Glory ..., Afflicted and stuck fast by grievous perils, О compassionate 
Accomplisher of all, Who art the God of all, we all set Thy thrice-holy tabernacle 
to pray before Thee, and we cry unto Thee: Loose Thou the bonds of Thy 
servants! 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., The billows of sin cruelly batter me and drag me down into the 
abyss of transgressions; and the tempests of adverse thoughts batter my soul. О 
thou who hast given birth to the Helmsman, hasten thou to rescue thy servant. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
In submitting to the serpent, Eve begat grief for women; but having believed 
the tidings of God, О Virgin, thou didst cause Joy to blossom forth for the whole 
world. 
Eve was first formed from the rib of Adam of old; and now God is begotten 
of the Mother and Bride of God: He is born, incarnate without a father, from the 
Virgin. 
Glory ..., Eve rejoiceth, for the maiden who incorruptly conceived the Judge 
and gave birth to the Compassionate One, hath shown her first mother to be free 
from the ancient curse. 
Both now ..., My life hath been filled with transgressions, my mind is plagued 
with passions, and my soul is condemned; wherefore, in thy compassion, have 
mercy and save me, О Lady. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Having found thee to be a pillar and cloud of light, О Virgin Mother of the 
Bestower of light, we who walk in the wilderness of deception escape evils. 
Rejoice, О thou who hast given birth in the flesh to God Who before the ages 
was incorporeally begotten of the Father, and hath been well-pleased to appear to 
us openly. 
Glory ..., The sun hath been surpassed by thy radiance, О Mary; for thou hast 
held in thine arms Him Who adorned the sky with luminaries, and didst feed Him 
at thy breast. 
Both now ..., Condemn me not to the unquenchable fire, О Christ my Savior, 
by the supplications of the pure one who gave birth to Thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
О pure Ever-virgin, without sustaining harm thou didst bear in thy womb the 
wondrous God Who of old saved the prophet Jonah in the sea monster. 
Bearing the Lord God of hosts Who restraineth the storms of the sea, О most 
pure Virgin, thou didst still the briny billows of delusion. 
Glory ..., Having given birth to Christ, the Peace of all, О most pure one, by 
thy prayers to Him tame the raging storms of the passions which assail me. 
Both now ..., On the day of grief, when the bonds holding soul and body 
together will be severed, intercede for me, and rescue me from the surrounding 
demons. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Beholding Thee willingly hanging upon the Cross between two thieves, О 
Christ, Thy Mother, her maternal womb rent with pain, exclaimed: “O my sinless 
Son, how have they unjustly crucified Thee on the Cross as a malefactor, Thee 
Who desireth to bring life to the race of mankind, in that Thou art supremely 
good?” 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
God Who made a journey to meet with Abraham the forefather became thy 
Son, О blessed one; and He made his seed a blessing for the nations. 
Thou art the ladder of Jacob, О undefiled one; for God depicted thee as the 
one Mother, for whose sake God gathered together his children. 
Glory ..., The incarnate Son, Who is supremely exalted with the Father and the 
Spirit, having chosen thee, О pure one, loved thee exceedingly, that thou mightest 
become a dwelling-place for Him. 
Both now ..., Do thou ever entreat the God to Whom thou hast given birth, 
that He save me, wretch though I am, and accept me, the simple one who cries 
out with faith: Blessed art Thou, О God! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thy birthgiving eludes examination, О Virgin, and is revealed to those who cry 
out with faith: All ye works of the Lord, hymn ye the Lord, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout the ages! 
In nowise having fallen from the glory of virginity, thou hast been enriched 
also with the honor of motherhood, О thou who knewest not wedlock. He Who 
worketh wonders hath made this clearly known, and we supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages. 
Glory ..., Behold the affliction of my lowly soul, О most pure one, and quickly 
deliver me from pain, that I may glorify thee throughout the ages. 
Both now ..., Mercifully accept Thy Mother, who prayeth that Thou save Thy 
people, whom Thou hast acquired by Thy precious Blood, О good Word, that we 
may call Thee blessed throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
О Lady Theotokos, entreat the adored Trinity, to Whom alone thou hast given 
birth for us without suffering in the flesh, that He grant peace to those on earth, 
and that remission of sins be granted to those who hymn thee. 
Even though Emmanuel is understood to be a single Person, yet He hath two 
natures; for, lo! we proclaim two wills and activities in Him, and we confess thee, 
His Mother, to be the Theotokos. 
Glory ..., I utter lamentation for myself, pondering the multitude of my sins, 
the uprisings of my passions, the despondency of my soul and the inconstancy of 
my mind. Grant salvation to me, wretch that I am, 
Both now ..., Assailing me like brigands, and stripping me of my radiant and 
luminous vesture, mine enemies have inflicted many wounds upon me. О Lord, 
raise me up who am barely alive. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE V 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone V: 
The place of the skull became paradise, for no sooner was the tree of the 
Cross planted than straightway Thou, the Grapes of life, sprang forth, О Savior, 
unto our gladness. Glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet, 
for He is holy. 
О ye faithful, let us hymn our Savior and Redeemer, Who was willingly 
crucified, as He Himself knew and was well-pleased to do; and let us glorify Him, 
for He hath nailed the sins of all to the Cross, delivering the race of mankind from 
delusion, and hath granted us the kingdom. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee hanging willingly on the Cross between the 
thieves, О Christ, Thy Mother said maternally, her womb rent with pain: “O my 
sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross as a malefactor, 
Who desirest to give life to the race of mankind, in that Thou art compassionate?” 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V: 
О Savior Who of Thine own will endured crucifixion and freed us from 
corruption, we, the faithful, hymn and worship Thee, for Thou hast enlightened 
us with the power of the Cross; and with fear we glorify Thee as Lord and the 
Bestower of life, О Compassionate Lover of mankind. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
The tree of Thy Cross hath been shown to be salvation for the world, for 
Thou wast willingly affixed to it, delivering mortals from the curse. О Lord, Joy of 
all, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Today the memory of the passion-bearers shineth forth with 
radiance from the heavens; the choir of the angels keepeth festival, and the race of 
mankind celebrateth with them. Wherefore, they pray unto the Lord, that our 
souls find mercy. 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Through the Cross of thy Son, O thou who art full of the 
grace of God, hath the deception of idolatry been utterly vanquished, and the 
might of the demons hath fallen; wherefore, we, the faithful, ever hymn and bless 
thee as is meet, confessing thee to be the true Theotokos.  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “The co-beginningless Word ...”: 
When the ranks of the angels beheld Thee nailed to the Cross and having 
fallen asleep, О Jesus, King of all, they were stricken with awe; and straightway the 
hordes of the demons fled, and the gates of Hades were broken, the tyranny of 
death was cast down, and those dead in the grave arose. 
Adam received bitterness from the tree, falling headlong into corruption 
through the envy of the serpent; but when Thou wast nailed thereto О Jesus, life 
was planted, and because of the tree of the Cross we have once again made our 
abode in the heavens, the serpent hath been set at naught, corruption hath been 
slain, and we all offer Thee glory. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When the Mother who bore Thee without the pangs of 
childbirth beheld Thee lifted up upon the Cross, weeping, she lamented crying 
aloud: ‘‘Woe is me, O my sweetest Son! I am wounded in depths of my soul, 
seeing Thee now nailed upon the Cross as a malefactor, between two thieves.’’ 
ODE I 
Canon of the precious and life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is “By 
Thy Passion Thou dost save me from the passions, О my Christ,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone V:  
Irmos: Unto God the Savior * Who made His people pass dryshod through 
the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us 
sing: * For He hath been glorified. 
It was Thine own desire to didst endure the passion-slaying Passion, O Christ, 
and thereby slay him who of old brought death upon us in paradise; wherefore, we 
glorify Thy goodness. 
Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross, and the enemy fell headlong; and we, who 
are fallen, have been raised up and been made inhabitants of paradise, О Christ, 
glorifying the might of Thy kingdom. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
To the martyrs: Well armed with the shield of the Cross, ye arrayed yourselves 
for every battle with the demon, О most wise great-martyrs; and having 
vanquished him, ye have received glory. 
To the martyrs: Like honored sheep ye offered yourselves unto the Lamb Who 
was slain for our sake, О spiritual athletes, manifestly abolishing the sacrifices of 
the ungodly; wherefore, we call you blessed, О all-praised ones. 
Theotokion: For us, О pure Virgin, thou hast given birth to a little Babe, the 
Ancient of days, Who by His divine sufferings hath renewed human nature, which 
had grown old, О all-immaculate one. 
Another canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone V:  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
I know thee, О all-immaculate Mary, Virgin and Mother, to be a wellspring of 
compassion and a fervent intercessor; and I cry out to thee: Have mercy and 
compassion upon my humbled soul. 
Making His abode within thy womb, and taking human essence upon Himself, 
in that He is good, О pure one, the Son of God hath delivered all from the 
corruption of the serpent. 
Be mine enlightenment and hope of salvation, О all-immaculate Birthgiver of 
God, loosing the bonds of my transgressions, and delivering me from the 
torments and condemnation which are to come. 
Free my lowly soul from wicked thoughts, О Birthgiver of God, and make it a 
dwelling-place of God, that I may always glorify thee as is meet. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: By the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, * do Thou make steadfast 
mine understanding, * that I may hymn and glorify Thine arising on the 
third day.  
Nailed to the Tree, О Savior, Thou dost cause the fruit of corruption to wither 
away, and from Thy side poured forth upon us streams of incorruption, О Master. 
Thou wast slaughtered on the Tree like a lamb, О Master, marking the linings 
of our souls with Thy divine blood; wherefore, we glorify Thee with fear. 
To the martyrs: Bound with bonds, wounded in many and various ways, and 
cast to the wild beasts, О spiritual athletes, ye remained unshaken. 
To the martyrs: As grapes of the Vine of life ye poured forth the wine of 
martyrdom which gladdens the hearts of the faithful, О martyrs of our God. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Dying upon the Cross, thy Son and Lord was shown to be the 
Mediator of life for us, О pure one, glorifying those who hymn thee. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
By thy compassionate goodness, О Birthgiver of God, lead me up who have 
fallen into the destructive pit of grievous offenses. 
Arriving at the eventide of life, I am held fast by perplexity, O all-hymned one, 
and I cry out to thee: Show thyself to be my helper! 
О pure and holy Theotokos, grant me remission of sins, and ask for me 
salvation and everlasting joy.' 
Grant me tear-drops, О pure one, that I may drive doubt from my heart and 
earnestly hymn thee. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: I have heard report of the mighty deed * of Thy Cross, O Lord, * 
how Paradise was opened thereby, and I cried: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord. 
When Thou didst set upon the Cross, О Christ, Sun of righteousness, Thou 
didst shine forth never-waning light upon us who hymn Thine awesome 
dispensation, О Word. 
When once thou didst stand before the judgment-seat, О Christ our Judge, 
Thou didst condemn the unjust foe; and Thou wast crucified between the 
unrighteous thieves, justifying us. 
To the martyrs: Crowned with victory, the spiritual athletes of the Lord put 
the invisible enemy to shame, and cried aloud: Glory be to Thy power, О Lord! 
To the martyrs: Assembling with faith, let us honor the passion-bearers of 
Christ, the never-fading flowers of the noetic paradise, the most precious vessels. 
Theotokion: When thou didst behold on the Cross Christ to Whom thou hast 
given birth, О pure one, thou didst marvel at His ineffable long-suffering; 
wherefore, with Him we glorify thee. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Who can entreat the Judge concerning my wicked deeds and my transgressions 
if not thee, О pure one, thou only helper of the sinful? 

--- PAGE 12 ---
By thy power, О most pure one, raise me up who have fallen through many 
transgressions and enslaved my soul through sins, and free me from slavery by thy 
prayer. 
As thou hast given birth to the Creator and King of all, О all-immaculate and 
pure Theotokos, deliver me from every vile offense. 
I weep over myself when I bring to mind my many transgressions and the 
unquenchable fire; and I pray: Grant me time to repent, О most pure one. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou 
art our God; * we know none other besides Thee.  
When the rocks felt Thee lifted up upon the Tree, О Christ, they split asunder, 
and the foundations of the earth were shaken. 
The sun set aside its radiance when Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, О 
long-suffering Sun of righteousness. 
To the martyrs: The saints shine forth with the radiance of miracles, by the 
Spirit dispelling the darkness of sicknesses. 
To the martyrs: Your bodies were dismembered with the sword, О martyrs, 
but the spirit of divine love was never severed from you. 
Theotokion: Seeing the Savior lifted up upon the Cross, О all-immaculate 
Virgin Mother, thou didst lift up thy voice in lamentation. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О Lady, apply the bandages of thy tender compassion to the bruises which 
through sin have come to cover my whole body. 
Of old thou didst halt the advance of corruption by thy divine birthgiving, О 
most immaculate one, and thou hast now staunched the progress of my sins. 
Have mercy and compassion upon my soul, О Lady, and deliver it from 
condemnation and eternal torment. 
Look down and hearken unto my voice, О Lady, and deliver me from 
everlasting torment, I pray. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become 
my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and Thy right 
hand saved me, O Lord.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
When the Cross was planted in the ground, the fall of the demons came about, 
faith received the beginning of its confirmation, and evil hath been driven from 
our midst. 
The sun was extinguished when Thou didst light Thy flesh like a lamp upon 
the Tree, О Lord; and the coin was found which had been lost through the dark 
passions. 
To the martyrs: When Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, Thou didst have the 
choir of martyrs following in Thy steps, emulating Thy Passion as the mediator of 
dispassion, О Lover of mankind. 
To the martyrs: With the streams of your blood ye dried up the torrents of 
delusion, О crowned martyrs, and ye extinguished the alien fire of the demons 
with divine dew. 
Theotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, О all-immaculate Virgin, when thou 
didst behold the Creator crucified, His divine side pierced by a spear. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
The deep of transgressions hath surrounded me, and the abyss of sin hath 
firmly gripped me, and bringeth me to pernicious despair. But save me now, О 
holy Lady! 
Raise me up who lie upon the bed offenses, O most holy Lady, and grant me 
the effulgence of salvation through repentance. 
Through the supplications of her who in purity gave birth to Thee, cleanse me, 
О Lover of mankind; and deliver Thy world from all tribulation, and vouchsafe us 
everlasting glory. 
I ever promise to cease mine evil deeds, yet I always lie, and grieve my Master. 
О most pure Lady, grant me correction. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
That we might be delivered from pleasurable sin, Thou didst taste gall, О 
Christ, Thou sweetness of life. 
When Thou wast wounded on the Tree, О Christ, Thou didst heal the wounds 
Adam had suffered for many years. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
To the martyrs: With eagerness of will ye set yourselves apart for suffering, О 
passion-bearers, and were shown to be victors. 
To the martyrs: Having honored God by enduring painful dishonor, О 
spiritual athletes, ye received honor on high. 
Theotokion: After giving birth thou hast remained as thou wast before 
birthgiving, О pure one; for God was born, that He might deify mankind. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О pure Birthgiver of God, disdain me not who with faith ever flee beneath thy 
protection. 
О Birthgiver of God who ever driest up the pasture of my passions, grant that 
I may shed abundant drops of tears. 
By thy supplications release me who am bound with the chains of my sins, О 
most immaculate one, for thou hast given birth to our all-hymned God. 
Unto thee do I flee with faith, О pure one, and to thee do I cry: Deliver me 
from everlasting fire, О Virgin! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast born of the Father * hath 
in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O ye priests 
hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
О Savior, Who healed the curse of the tree by the Tree and hast poured forth 
blessing upon mankind, we hymn and glorify Thee throughout the ages! 
By Thy Cross Thou didst bring down the serpent who exalted himself, and 
when Thou wast laid low Thou didst raise up him who had grievously fallen. 
Thee, О Savior, do we hymn and supremely exalt throughout all ages! 
To the martyrs: With faith let us hymn the passion-bearers in the heavens: the 
destroyers of delusion, the champions of the divine Faith, the pillars of the 
Church, the truly hard diamonds, the warriors of Christ. 
To the martyrs: The glorious passion-bearers shone forth like the sun, through 
grace driving away the clouds of sicknesses; and by faith in the Trinity they 
dispelled the gloom of ungodliness. 
Theotokion: Gabriel was sent as an escort for the bride, О Virgin, and he cried 
out to thee, saying: О most splendid palace of Christ, the King of all, when He 
shall make His abode within thee, He shall deify all mankind! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
At a loss, I have no fear of the threat of Gehenna in either heart or mind, and 
I ever commit sins; but do thou, О Virgin, free me from vexation, and deliver me 
from the fire. 
I am often dragged out and sold like a captive by the pleasures of my flesh, 
and I ever anger God. О Theotokos, thou only help of the helpless, do thou 
thyself have mercy upon me! 
Thy prayer is sure and certain, О all-immaculate one, for whatsoever things 
thou desirest thou givest, entreating thy Son and God. Wherefore, I pray thee: 
Have mercy and save my lowly soul! 
I am cruelly tested by bodily sickness, rising passions and wounds of soul. О 
thou who hast given birth to the only Benefactor, by thy supplications restore my 
health. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thee the true Mother of God, * who above all understanding * and 
beyond all description, * ineffably brought forth in time * the Eternal One, 
* with one mind do we the faithful magnify. 
The might and dominion of the enemy were taken away, О only mighty Lord, 
when Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross and didst bloody Thy fingers thereon. 
О my Christ, the iniquitous ones who crucified Thee impaled Thy hands and 
feet and reckoned the number of Thy bones; and they gave thee vinegar with gall 
to drink. 
To the martyrs: Before the tyrants ye preached God Who became man with 
radiant mouths, О passion-bearers, and have inherited glory. 
To the martyrs: Beating you, the enemies who wounded you with stripes and 
divers tortures became sick, О divine martyrs, all-honored physicians of illnesses. 
Theotokion: Jesus the Light shone forth upon us from thee, О pure one, and 
enlightened all creation by His crucifixion, dispelling the darkness of the demons. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Grant me tears of repentance before the end of my life arrives, О most pure 
one, that I may weep over my grievous and unjust deeds. 
Why dost thou offend thy Master, О my soul, committing unrighteous deeds? 
Why dost thou not arise? Wherefore, before the end hasten thou to repent. 
Deliver me from evil transgressions and tribulations. Grant me mercy, О all-
pure Virgin, and a divine share in incorruptible life. 
Thee have we acquired as the intercessor who hast ineffably given birth unto 
God, the insurmountable rampart and salvation of our souls, and a wellspring of 
miracles. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone V: 
No sooner was the tree of Thy Cross planted, О Christ, than the deception of 
idols was driven away and grace blossomed forth; for the tyranny of 
condemnation was found no more, but the triumph of our salvation was made 
manifest. For the Cross is our boast, the Cross is our confirmation, the Cross is 
our joy! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
For our sake Thou wast led as a sheep to sacrifice and as an innocent lamb to 
voluntary slaughter, О Christ Immanuel; and Thou wast reckoned among the 
iniquitous. Come, О ye nations of the homeland, and hymn and worship the 
endless Life Who was lifted up upon the Cross! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Blessed is the army of the King of heaven, for even though 
the passion-bearers were mortal, yet they strived to attain the dignity of the angels; 
and having spurned their bodies, for the sake of their passions they have been 
deemed worthy of honors. By their supplications, О Lord, save Thou our souls! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Standing at the foot of the Cross, О Jesus, she who gave 
birth to Thee lamented, weeping and cried aloud: “I cannot bear these things, 

--- PAGE 17 ---
seeing Thee to Whom I gave birth nailed to the Tree! I escaped the pangs of 
childbirth, since I never knew a husband, so how now am I wracked with pain and 
wounded in heart? For now the words spoken by Symeon have been fulfilled: ‘A 
sword shall pierce thy heart, О immaculate one!’ Yet now arise, О my soul, and 
save those who hymn Thee!” 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE V  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone V: 
Believing Thee to be God, the thief on the cross confessed Thee, О Christ, 
crying out in purity from the depths of his heart: Remember me, О Lord, in Thy 
kingdom! 
Dying on the Cross, О compassionate Bestower of life, Thou gavest life unto 
Adam, upon whom death had come through eating, and Thou didst show him to 
be a dweller in paradise, О good One. 
Thou wast nailed to the Cross, О Christ, Thou true vine, and hast poured 
forth the fluid of salvation, giving drink through grace unto the hearts of all the 
faithful. 
To the martyrs: When ye were beaten and dismembered, О wise ones, ye 
emulated the sacrifice of the Master; wherefore, ye are ever called blessed, О 
martyrs of Christ. 
Glory ..., With faith we worship Thee, the one God in three Hypostases, the 
indivisible and supremely divine Essence; and we cry out to Thee: Glory be to 
Thee, О Trinity and Unity, our God! 
Both now ..., She who beheld our Life dead of His own will upon the tree of 
the Cross, beat her breast, weeping; wherefore, we all ever bless her with divine 
voices. 
 
On Friday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the 
footstool of His feet, for He is holy.  
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
 
Communion Verse: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, 
O God.  
