--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING: TONE V 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” these Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
With the streams of their blood the passion-bearers quenched the flame of 
grievous ungodliness; and enkindling the radiance of piety throughout the whole 
world, they utterly consumed the false gods and their fetid stench. They have 
shone forth the most pure light upon those on earth, and enlightened thereby, we 
elude the darkness of ungodliness and evade the delusion of idols, worshipping 
Christ, Who granteth the world great mercy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Easily setting at naught the words of the ungodly heretics and their pursuit, ye 
became warriors of the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without 
beginning, and the Holy Spirit, the Unity of Divinity in three Hypostases, teaching 
the faithful with piety of mind and confirming the preaching of Orthodoxy. 
Wherefore, ye are called blessed, О most sacred pastors, for in life-bearing 
pastures ye tended the flock of Christ, for Whom ye endured all manner of pangs 
and many and varied trials. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Receiving mastery of mind through the doing of virtuous deeds, the company 
of the venerable, who struggled, with ease utterly trampled the carnal passions 
underfoot. Thereby they valiantly overcame all the wiles of the demons and were 
revealed to be conversers with the angels, since they lived as ones incorporeal. 
And they now rejoice in the mansions on high, living in splendor, and standing 
before Christ, beseech Him to grant our souls great mercy. 
These Stichera of the holy martyrs, in the same tone: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Girding themselves with the shield of faith, and arming themselves with the 
sign of the Cross, Thy saints O Lord, bravely gave themselves over to torments, 
casting down the pride and delusion of the devil. By their supplications, O God 
almighty, send down peace upon the world, and great mercy upon our souls. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Repeat: Girding themselves with the shield of faith ..., 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Despising all things earthly, and bravely withstanding torture, ye were not 
deprived of your goodly hope, but became heirs of the Kingdom of heaven. O ye 
all-famed martyrs, since ye have boldness before God the Lover of mankind, ask 
that peace be granted to the world, and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion: 
In the Red Sea of old * an image of the Bride who knew not wedlock was 
depicted. * There Moses was the one who parted the sea, * here Gabriel is the 
minister of the miracle. * At that time Israel marched dry-shod through the deep, 
* now the Virgin doth seedlessly give birth to Christ. * The sea after Israel's 
passage remained impassable; * the immaculate one after bearing Emmanuel 
remained incorrupt. * O God, Who doth exist and is pre-eternal, * and hath 
appeared as man, ** have mercy upon us. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise up 
against me redeem me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Intercede on our behalf, O holy martyrs, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities: for unto you hath been given the grace to pray for us.  
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
With your souls filled with insatiable love, O holy martyrs, ye did not deny 
Christ; and enduring divers wounds in sufferings, ye cast down the audacity of the 
tyrants, and keeping the faith unaltered and unharmed, ye were translated to the 
heavens. Wherefore, since ye have boldness before Him, ask that He grant us 
great mercy. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: I called to mind the words of the prophet, ‘I am but dust and 
ashes.’ I went also to the tombs, and beheld the bones laid bare, and I said: 
‘Which is the king or which the warrior, which the rich man or which the beggar, 

--- PAGE 3 ---
which the righteous or which the sinner?’ But grant rest with the righteous, O 
Lord, to Thy servants, as the Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou who art full of joy, intercede by thy supplications, and beg that a 
multitude of compassions, and the cleansing of our many sins, be granted to our 
souls, we entreat thee.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
FRIDAY NIGHT: TONE V 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Christ, who with an upraised arm * bringeth wars to naught, * hath 
shaken horse and rider in the Red Sea; * but Israel hath He saved * as they 
chanted a song of victory. 
All the generations of mankind praise thee, О Virgin, as thou didst foretell in 
prophecy of old; wherefore, accept me who hymn thee, О Lady, and enlighten 
and make me wise. 
Thou hast broken the sting of death and the sin of the world, О Virgin Lady, 
having given birth to true Life. Quickly break also the sharp arrows of my 
passions. 
Glory ..., Having been revealed to be the only one arrayed in virgin’s vesture, 
thou didst rend asunder the fig-leaves which Adam wore; wherefore, clothe me in 
the garments of chastity by thy prayers. 
Both now ..., Many daughters of Adam before thee acquired riches and divine 
glory, but thou hast surpassed them all beyond compare, О Lady; wherefore, 
enrich me now with heavenly and divine grace. 
ODE III 
Irmos: By Thy command Thou didst establish the earth upon nothing * 
and suspended it unsupported; * do Thou establish Thy Church on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy commandments, O Christ, * Who alone art good 
* and the Lover of mankind. 
The depths and heights of the unapproachable wisdom of God, Who was 
born from thy womb, have been recognized in thee, whereby deliver my heart 
from the depths of the serpent’s reasoning. 
О Christ, Who of old fashioned out of water the winged creatures and 
serpents, which before had not existed: Thou didst straightway fashion the strange 
vesture of Thy divine incarnation out of the blood of the pure Virgin. 
Glory ..., Thou alone, О most pure one, art clearly the cleansing of our nature, 
for in thee the divine Fire made His abode without consuming thee, that He 
might purify it; wherefore, cleanse me of the defilement of the offenses of my 
passions, and illumine me by thy prayers. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Both now ..., Knowing thee to be the cup of the Offshoot of the new vine, 
manifestly giving drink to the faithful for the remission offenses, О most pure 
one, I pray: Give drink to my heart with an outpouring of divine water. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Habbakuk, prophetically apprehending * Thy divine self-emptying, 
O Christ, * cried out to Thee with trembling: * Thou hast come for the 
salvation of Thy people; * to save Thine anointed ones. 
Thou hast been revealed to be the unploughed furrow which produced the 
unsown divine Grain, whereby I, who hunger, am fed with divine gifts and grace. 
Giving drink with the water of thy prayers to me who am truly sick unto death 
and am stuck fast in the fire of the passions of my soul, raise me up quickly. 
Glory ..., As thou art the animate city of God, gladdened by the flow of noetic 
rivers, make steadfast the house of my soul with the pillars of thy prayers. 
Both now ..., Knowing thee to be the cloud raining down true righteousness, 
О most pure Lady, I pray that thou speedily deliver me thy servant from all who 
oppress me. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I rise 
early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, O 
Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Utterly suppress the turbulence and billows of sin and my passions, О Virgin 
Lady, having given birth to the Cause of dispassion. 
Shown from on high to be Christ’s cloth of the divine vesture of majesty, О 
pure one, with the raiment of the virtues clothe my naked soul. 
Glory ..., Grant me cleansing offenses by thy supplications, О pure Virgin who 
hast given birth for us to Christ the Lord, our divine Purification. 
Both now ..., By thy prayers, О Virgin, do away with the sores, wounds and 
stripes of my sins, and grant power to thy servant. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Calm the raging sea of the passions, * O Master Christ, * with its 
soul-destroying tempest, * and lead me up from corruption * in that Thou 
art compassionate. 
О thou who hast given birth to the Light Who created the luminaries of the 
sky, illumine now my soul and deliver me from the darkness of the passions, О 
all-radiant one. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Entreat thy Son, Who of old sweetened the waters of Mara, О Theotokos, that 
He quickly deliver me from grievous suffering and bitterness. 
Glory ..., The torrents of the passions disturb my soul, О most pure one; yet 
dry them up by thy prayers, and destroy my wicked thoughts. 
Both now ..., Delivering mankind, Christ hath issued forth out of Sion, from 
thy womb, О most immaculate Lady; and hath thereby delivered me from perils 
and tribulations. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Wherefore, growing despondent, hast thou forgotten thy God, Who hath 
mercy upon thee, О my passion-plagued soul? Despising His precepts, thou hast 
come in wickedness and prodigality to the end of thy life. But shun evil, crying out 
to the Theotokos: Have mercy on mine accursed soul! 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The supremely exalted Lord of our fathers * quenched the flame, * 
and bedewed the youths * as they chanted in harmony: * O God, blessed 
art Thou! 
The hordes of the demons fear and tremble before the invocation of thy 
name, О most pure one. Deliver me from them, save and preserve me, protecting 
me from all harm. 
Inexpressible is thy glory, О Virgin; for thou hast given birth to the Lord of 
glory. Wherefore, grant unto me the glory of thy Son and my God, by thy prayers. 
Glory ..., Incline thine ear to the supplications of thy servant, О Lady, and 
speedily deliver me from tribulations and misfortunes, from all temptations, 
visible and invisible. 
Both now ..., With purity wash me who am wholly shameful and have sullied 
and defiled myself with the passions, and make me radiant through the sprinkling 
of thy prayers, О Virgin. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
The passion-plagued water of barrenness hath rendered the womb of my soul 
fruitless and dried it up. Rain down the divine Dew upon me, О light cloud, that I 
may bring forth fruits of repentance. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
By thy prayers, О most pure one, calm, thou the water and storm of 
passionate thoughts, and guide me to the stream of dispassion, that I may glorify 
thee fervently throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., О noetic portal, closed gate, which God alone hath passed through: 
Close and lock the gates of my passions, and open unto me the portals of hope. 
Both now ..., Remove from me the burden of transgressions, О Virgin 
Mother, who alone ineffably hast given birth to the Lamb and Word of God, Who 
taketh away all the sin of the world. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * Who is both God and man; * 
and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call blessed. 
Having as a man defiled my soul with many transgressions and sullied it with 
carnal passions, I now earnestly beseech thee and pray to thee: From all evil 
cleanse me, О pure one, by thy prayers. 
Thou hast given birth to Him Who willeth mercy, the God of compassions 
and the Lover of mankind, Who alone is Good, Long-suffering and full of loving-
kindness. By thy supplications, О pure one, show Him to be well-disposed toward 
me, and grant me release from offenses. 
Glory ..., By thy ceaseless maternal supplications, О Lady, to the virtues of 
good works do thou rouse thy servant, who am stuck fast in the slumber of 
despondency and asleep now in pleasures. 
Both now ..., Blessing, I bless thee, О most pure one, and I magnify thee 
fervently. Wherefore, bless me who hymn thee; deliver me from all violence and 
grief, and by thy hands preserve me invincible. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE V 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone V:  
Today the memorial of the passion-bearers shineth forth with radiance from 
the heavens; the choir of the angels keepeth festival, and the human race 
celebrateth with them. Wherefore, they pray unto the Lord, that our souls find 
mercy. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Through the miracles of Thy holy martyrs, O Christ God, Thou hast given us 
an indestructible rampart. By their supplications make steadfast Thy faithful 
peoples, in that Thou art good and the Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, impassible portal of the Lord! * Rejoice, rampart and protection of 
those who have recourse unto thee! * Rejoice, haven untouched by storms, * and 
who knowing not wedlock, * didst bear in the flesh thy Creator and God. * Cease 
not to intercede for those ** who praise and worship thine Offspring. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone V: 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, longing to drink from the cup of Thy sufferings; 
forsook the beauties of life, and shared in the life of the angels. By their 
intercessions, O Christ, grant peace and great mercy to our souls. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
The hosts of heaven marveled exceedingly at the corrections of the holy 
martyrs; how, fighting the good fight in their mortal bodies, they invisibly 
vanquished the incorporeal foe by the power of the Cross; and they pray unto the 
Lord, that our souls find mercy. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. * Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
For the reposed: With the righteous grant rest, O our Savior, unto Thy 
servants, and settle them in Thy courts, as it hath been written, overlooking, in 
that Thou art good, all their transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, committed 
either knowingly and unknowingly, O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Christ God, Who hath shone forth upon the world from the Virgin and 
shown us forth as children of the light: have mercy upon us!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
ODE I 
Canon of the holy martyrs, hierarchs, the venerable and the departed, the 
acrostic whereof is “I offer these hymns to Thy servants, О Christ,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone V: 
Irmos: A land which the sun had never beheld, * and upon which it had 
never shined, * an abyss which the vault of heaven had not seen laid bare, * 
hath Israel traversed dry-shod, O Lord. * And Thou didst lead them to Thy 
mountain of sanctification, * as they sang and chanted * a hymn of victory. 
Surrendering your bodies to arrogant judges, ye endured unbearable wounds, 
О valiant spiritual athletes, expecting to receive honors from on high; and Christ 
led you into the eternal mansions of those who rejoice and chant the hymn of 
victory. 
The venerable and the righteous, and the holy hierarchs, fulfilling the right 
glorious precepts of God, pastured the people and guided them to the waters of 
understanding; and they have worthily received torrents of sweetness, pouring 
forth rivers of healing through grace. 
Through the prayers of the most glorious prophets, of the most wise 
hierarchs, and of the sacred women who with manly mind endured mightily and 
trampled underfoot the enemy by fasting, guide me, О Lord - Who appeared on 
earth by divine grace, to the havens of Life. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Thee do we beseech, the God Who is easy to 
reconcile: Grant rest in the bosom of Abraham unto Thy servants whom Thou 
hast taken to Thyself from the turmoil of life, and grant unto them eternal light, 
overlooking their offenses, in that Thou art good. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: “Rejoice!”, I cry to thee who hast given birth to Joy, 
О all-hymned one. Enlighten our minds and souls, and guide all in the steps of 
understanding, and entreat thy Son and God, that He grant cleansing of 
transgressions unto all, О only Bride of God. 
Another canon, of the departed, chanted when no Menaion is available, the 
acrostic whereof is “The fifth canon of Theophanes for the reposed,” in 
Tone V: 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior * Who made His people pass dryshod through 
the sea, * but drowned Pharaoh with all his host, * unto Him alone let us 
sing: * For He hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
With divine love the passion-bearers of Christ trampled the pride of the 
tyrants underfoot; and with faith they ask prayerful remission and rest for the 
departed. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Cause the departed to dwell in Thy holy habitations and courts, О Christ 
Master, Who shed Thine exceedingly precious blood to redeem our debt. 
Glory ..., The Wisdom of God, the Compassionate One Who beareth the 
express impress of the Father: Unto those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself grant 
rest, imparting everlasting blessedness unto them. 
Both now ..., О all-immaculate one, thou hast been shown to be the splendid 
tabernacle, the golden ark containing the divine Word Who assumed flesh for our 
sake, and destroyed the power of death. 
ODE III 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Do Thou establish my heart, O Lord, * which is shaken by the 
billows of life, * and guide it to a calm haven, O God. 
Ye spared not your bodies when they were beaten with staves and 
dismembered by the sword, О all-praised warrior martyrs, who were strengthened 
by the hope of everlasting- good things. 
Ye enlightened the vesture of the hierarchy, shepherding the flock of Christ in 
the fields of life through the virtues. 
Mortifying the flesh through asceticism, the venerable ones shared in divine 
life. By their sacred prayers, О Christ, deliver us from misfortunes. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Unto those who have fallen asleep grant heavenly 
rest, О Lover of mankind, remitting the debts they incurred upon earth, in that 
Thou art good. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: As they beheld thee, who art blessed among 
women, the company of women suffered and were taken to thy Son, О Virgin 
Mother. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Do Thou establish us O God our Savior, * by the might of Thy 
power, * and raise the horn of Thy Church, * that with right faith singeth 
praises unto Thee  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Struggling manfully, the spiritual athletes withstood the assaults of the tyrants; 
and they pray to Christ on behalf of those who have fallen asleep. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Receiving in Thy splendid mansions those who were nurtured on Thy laws 
and have reposed, grant them rest, О good One. 
Glory ..., О only merciful God, vouchsafe the splendors of the saints unto 
those whom Thou hast taken, overlooking their offenses. 
Both now ..., О pure one, we hymn thy birthgiving, whereby we have been 
delivered from the primal condemnation and curse and have been freed from 
death. 
ODE IV 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: I have heard Thy report, O Lord, * and I was afraid. * I came to 
knowledge of Thy dispensation, * and I glorified Thee, O only Lover of 
mankind. 
By Thy power, О Lord, the passion-bearers trampled underfoot the power of 
the enemy, and became the might and great confirmation of the faithful. 
All the venerable now rejoice with great joy, and the divine priests are clothed 
in righteousness as in a garment. 
Let us all hymn the divinely eloquent prophets of God, and let us honor the 
company of women who ran well the good race. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Guiding to the harbor of Thy kingdom those whom 
Thou hast taken from the tumult and tempest of this present life, О Master, grant 
them rest. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Through thee, О Virgin, the Timeless One hath 
now come under time. Him do thou entreat, that He free my soul from the 
transgressions I have committed in time. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: I have heard, O Lord, * of Thine arising from the tomb, * and have 
glorified * Thine invincible power.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Piously confessing Thee to be equally eternal with the Father, О Christ, the 
martyrs were slain; and they cry out to Thee: Deliver Thy servants, whom Thou 
hast taken to Thyself, О Christ! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
As the only mortal free among the dead, О Christ, giving life everlasting to 
mortals grant rest to Thy departed servants. 
Glory ..., О Christ Who camest to save the lost, grant a dwelling-place in 
paradise unto those departed in faith, О Thou Who dost justify man by grace. 
Both now ..., The power of the Most High overshadowed thee, О maiden, and 
made of thee a paradise of life, having the Lord and Mediator as a tree in thy 
midst. 
ODE V 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Hasten Thou and have compassion on my wretched soul, * which 
doth battle at night * with the darkness of the passions. * Shine in me with 
the brightness of the day, * O noetic Sun, * and thereby make the night 
give way to light. 
The bones of the martyrs pour forth healing upon the infirm, for, unbroken 
by malice, they restore our broken state and grind to dust all the bones of 
ungodliness. 
Observing Thy laws, the holy hierarchs shepherded the people and guided 
them to the life which is to come, О Compassionate One; and the venerable ones 
slew the tyranny of the passions with a perfect mind. 
Let the prophets be honored, and with them all who were righteous by faith; 
and let the divine women who lived in holiness and shone forth on earth through 
their torments be praised as servants of Christ. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Thy faithful servants, whom Thou hast taken from 
earth, do Thou number in the mansions of heaven, overlooking their 
transgressions, О Christ Who in Thine exceeding goodness wast incarnate for the 
sake of us mortals. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: We hymn thee, О Virgin , through whom God 
appeared to those who earth, becoming a man; and we cry aloud: Rejoice, О right 
fertile ground which produced the mystic Grain which feedeth every creature! 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Waking at dawn, * we cry unto Thee, O Lord: * Save us, for Thou 
art our God; * we know none other besides Thee.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Accepting the entreaties of the martyrs, О Lord, among the elect number the 
souls whom Thou hast received. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Thou didst foretell that those who believe on Thee will not see death, О 
Master; wherefore, grant rest to the departed. 
Glory ..., Grant that Thy servants receive the beauty of Thy house, О Lord, 
and a share in delight. 
Both now ..., О Word Who art equally eternal with the Father and wast 
incarnate from the Virgin: Thou hast slain death by death.. 
ODE VI 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Even as Thou didst deliver the prophet from the beast, O Lord, * so 
do Thou lead me up from the depths * of unrestrained passions, I pray 
Thee, * that I may dare * to look upon Thy holy temple. 
Surrendering their bodies into the hands of the torturers to be wounded, the 
divine martyrs rejoiced in soul; for they truly beheld divine and everlasting joy and 
divine rewards. 
О Christ, Thou art the glory of the most wise holy hierarchs and the venerable. 
Through their supplications have pity on Thy people, whom Thou hast acquired 
by Thy blood, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
Illumined in mind by Thee, О Lord, the prophets clearly revealed things far 
distant as though they were close; and by Thy power women have destroyed the 
dominion of the enemy through suffering and fasting. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Numbering Thy faithful servants, who have 
departed from us, among the choirs of the elect, О good Lord, grant them rest, 
overlooking all their offenses in Thy loving-kindness. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: О Lord Who created Eve in the beginning, and 
entered the Virgin’s womb: Having clothed Thyself in the form of a servant Thou 
workest our restoration, О Master of all. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The abyss hath encompassed me, * the sea monster hath become 
my grave; * but I cried unto Thee, * the Lover of mankind, * and Thy right 
hand saved me, O Lord.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
The army of Thy martyrs, likening themselves to the hosts on high, beseech 
Thee, О Christ: Unto those who have departed grant the bliss which cometh from 
Thee, О Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
In that Thou lovest mankind, О Christ, number Thy servants, whom Thou 
hast taken to Thyself, in places of coolness, in places of the splendor of the saints, 
in places of ease. 
Glory ..., Cleanse Thy servants, and grant them forgiveness offenses, О Lover 
of mankind; and grant unto them life incorruptible and a blessed inheritance. 
Both now ..., Who can recount in words the wonder of thy seedless 
conception, О all-immaculate one; for thou hast given birth unto God. Who came 
to us in His loving-kindness. 
ODE VII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: The prayer of the Children quenched the fire * and the furnace 
which bedewed them proclaimed the miracle, * for it neither burned nor 
consumed those, * who chanted hymns unto the God of our Fathers. 
Set aflame with the fire of cruel torments, О glorious martyrs, ye showed most 
fervent love for the Lord, which cooled you with the understanding of piety. 
Having adorned yourselves with the wisdom of the Spirit, and lived splendid 
lives, ye performed the sacred acts of the grace of the Gospel; wherefore we praise 
you as ministers of God. 
О venerable ones, who mortified the flesh with many pangs, ye have been 
deemed worthy of the life to come, praying that we who have been slain by the 
assaults of the passions may receive it. 
With faith let the blessed choir of the prophets of God and the assembly of 
sacred women, who struggled in asceticism and by suffering cast down the enemy, 
be praised. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: О Word Who hast given a share in the life of all 
unto the dead, who have now left behind the turmoil of life: do Thou guide them 
to Thy divine haven, overlooking their offenses, О good One. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Let us, who with upright mind understand thee to 
be the Theotokos, be delivered by thy mediation from darkness and the invisible 
foes who wage war upon us, О Lady. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The children were saved * in the burning furnace, * chanting: 
Blessed art Thou * O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
О Savior, grant that those who have departed may now partake of the 
unapproachable light, through the supplications of Thy passion-bearers. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
О compassionate Christ, number among the Church of the firstborn those 
who have departed in faith. 
Glory ..., О Savior, grant rest unto Thy servants who have departed unto Thee, 
adorning them with the raiment of incorruption. 
Both now ..., Having conceived Life without seed, О all-immaculate one, thou 
didst staunch the flow of the essence of death. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: O ye company of angels, * and assembly of mankind; * ye priests, 
Levites, and peoples: * praise, bless, and supremely exalt the King and 
Creator of all, * throughout all ages. 
Navigating the deep of torments with the rudder of the Word, О spiritual 
athletes, ye drowned all the hordes of the deceiver in the outpouring of your 
blood, and live throughout all ages. 
As most wise sacred ministers, by the waters of Orthodoxy ye nurtured in a 
sacred manner the flock entrusted to you; and ye truly delight in the sweet torrents 
of beauty. 
Having done the works of light, О venerable ones, ye were revealed to the 
faithful as lamps, and have passed over to the divine Effulgence. Pray ye to the 
Master, that He free us from darkness. 
Be glad, О company of women who through wounds received the fullness of 
all honors! Rejoice forever, О choir of the prophets, and ye righteous who were 
pleasing unto Christ! 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Grant, О Master, that Thy servants who have 
departed this life may without hindrance pass by the sword which is now 
withdrawn, causing them to dwell in paradise, in that Thou alone art merciful. 
Both now ..., Theotokion: Let us hymn the joyous Virgin Mary as the gate 
leading to the divine entry, the easily mounted ladder of God, the unerring guide 
for those who seek salvation. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The Son of God who before all ages * wast begotten of the Father * 
hath in these last times * become incarnate of the Virgin Mother, * O ye 
priests hymn, * and ye peoples supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
We hymn Thee, О Savior, Who dost accept the struggles of the holy martyrs, 
for their sake granting peace unto those who have departed in the Faith; let us 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
As Thou art compassionate, О Savior, grant that those who have departed 
from us may be illumined by the radiance of Thy heavenly glory, and hymn and 
exalt Thee supremely throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., Reckon with the choirs of the saints those whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself, О Savior, and number them with Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham, for 
they hymn and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Both now ..., Thou wast adorned with the beauty of purity, О Virgin Mother, 
becoming the habitation of the magnificence of the virtues; wherefore, we hymn 
and supremely exalt thee, the pure one, throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: For the mighty One hath done great things to thee, * in that He 
showed thee forth as a pure Virgin * even after giving birth, * since thou art 
she that hath seedlessly borne her own creator, * wherefore, O Theotokos, 
* we magnify thee. 
Let the sacred ministers and pastors, the choir of the holy prophets, the 
countless multitude of the righteous and the assembly of the martyrs be blessed 
with sacred hymns, for they pray that our souls be saved. 
The wondrous council of the venerable, having struggled most wisely in 
asceticism, hath now been rendered wondrous by many displays of miracles. By 
their prayers, О wondrous Lord, show forth the wonder of Thy mercy upon all. 
With faith and love let the countless multitude of women who suffered and 
fasted, and who abide with the angelic choirs, be blessed with the hieromartyrs 
who finished well the race. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: The multitudes of all the saints entreat Thee, О 
Word: In the magnitude of Thy mercy grant rest to the multitudes who with faith 
have passed from the earth, overlooking the offenses they committed during their 
life. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion: In sickness of mind I committed many sins, О 
Virgin, and torment awaiteth me in the future. Deliver me from such, for I come 
to thee with an unwavering heart, and I call upon thy divine protection. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: O Thou who art God's Mother transcending mind and word, * who 
ineffably in time * hast given birth unto the Timeless One, * Thee do we 
the faithful magnify with one accord.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Having received rewards for their sacred sufferings, the martyrs now beseech 
Thee to grant remission unto those who have departed in faith, О Savior. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Thou didst endure death, О only immortal Savior, granting resurrection and 
the radiance of immortality unto the dead, in that Thou art compassionate. 
Glory ..., Thou didst set us aright who have fallen into death, and didst teach 
us to hope for everlasting life, which do Thou grant unto Thy servants. 
Both now ..., The shadows of the Law have passed away at thy birthgiving, О 
Theotokos; truth hath shone forth, and grace hath been bestowed; wherefore, we 
magnify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
On the Praises, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone V: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the martyrs: Blessed is the army of the heavenly King: for though the 
passion-bearers were born of this earth, spurning the pangs of their bodies they 
hastened to attain to the dignity of the angels; and through their sufferings were 
deemed worthy of the honour of the incorporeal hosts. By their prayers, O Lord, 
send down upon us great mercy. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Thy passion-bearers, O Lord, emulating the life of the angelic ranks; endured 
tortures as though incorporeal, in oneness of mind possessing the hope of the 
blessings promised them. By their intercessions, O Christ God, grant peace to Thy 
world, and great mercy to our souls. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
The holy martyrs struggled here on earth, enduring cold and given over to fire 
and water. And as the waters received them, they cried aloud: “We went through 
fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment!” By their prayers, О 
Christ God, have mercy upon us! 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Rejoicing in the midst of their torments, the saints cried aloud: “These things 
are goods with which we may trade with the Lord: for, instead of the wounds we 
bear on our bodies, radiant vesture shall blossom forth for us upon our 
resurrection; instead of dishonor, we shall receive crowns; instead of fetters in 
prison, we shall receive paradise; and instead of condemnation with malefactors, 
we shall have life with the angels!” By their supplications, О Lord, save Thou our 
souls! 
For the reposed: Thou hast fashioned me, O Lord, and set Thine hand upon 
me; and Thou hast commanded me, saying; ‘To the earth shalt thou return once 
more.’ Guide me on Thy right path, forgive me my transgressions, and absolve 
and save me, I pray Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Alas, O wretched soul! What answer wilt thou have to give to the 
Judge at that hour when the thrones are set for judgment and the Judge 
descendeth from the heavens, with myriads of angels? When He is seated upon 
the judgment seat to try His unprofitable servants like me, what shalt thou bring 
forth then? Truly naught, having defiled thy mind and body, wherefore, fall down 
before the Virgin, and cry without ceasing, that she grant thee abundant 
forgiveness of sins!  
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the departed, in Tone V:  
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
With the light of Thy countenance, O Christ, enlighten those who have 
departed, as Thou art compassionate, and lead them to a place of verdure, beside 
the waters of Thy pure divine repose. In the longed for bosom of our forefather 
Abraham, where Thy light shineth in purity, and the springs of love ever pour 
forth, where the assemblies of all the righteous rejoice and exult in Thy goodness. 
Number Thy servants with them, and grant them great mercy. ‘ 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. 
О Compassionate One, be Thou well-pleased to grant those who have passed 
from transitory things unto Thee, the Master of all and our God, all-harmonious 
voices to hymn and glorify Thy might; and grant that they may be enlightened by 
Thy beauty, and in a most pure manner partake of sweet and beauteous 
communion with Thee, where the angels rejoice around Thy throne and the choirs 
of the saints joyously stand round about. Grant rest with them and great mercy 
unto Thy servants. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Unto those who have fallen asleep in faith, grant rest with the choir of the 
prophets, with the ranks of the apostles and the martyrs, and with all those who 
from time immemorial, have been justified by Thy redeeming Passion and Thy 
Blood, by which Thou hast ransomed captive mankind. In Thy love forgive them 
all their offences, for Thou alone hast lived a sinless life upon the earth, Thou 
alone art holy, Thou alone art free among the dead. Therefore grant unto Thy 
servants rest and great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Having conceived Christ the King and Bestower of life, we who 
were enslaved by the law of sin, O Lady, have been set free, O only Virgin 
Mother. Through Him we are freely justified by grace. Entreat Him now to write 
into the book of life, the names of those who acknowledge thee to be the 
Birthgiver of God; that saved by Thy mediation, we may receive from Thy Son 
redemption, worshipping Him Who granteth the world great mercy. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE V  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone V:  
Believing Thee to be God, the thief on the cross confessed Thee, О Christ, 
crying out in purity from the depths of his heart: Remember me, О Lord, in Thy 
kingdom! 
Dying, О martyrs, ye destroyed the enemy, the author of evil, and, crowned 
with divine victories, ye mounted on high, where ye stand before God, the King 
of all. 
Illumined by the light of the priesthood, О holy hierarchs, ye were glorified; 
and the multitude of the venerable have received life everlasting. Wherefore, they 
are blessed. 
Those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, О Master, do Thou cause to dwell 
with the choirs of the elect in a place of ease, О Christ the Word, overlooking the 
offenses they committed on earth. 
Glory ..., О adored Trinity, be Thou entreated by the struggles of the holy 
hierarchs and honored martyrs; and grant salvation and great mercy unto the souls 
of those who departed in faith. 
Both now ..., О divinely joyous one, thou didst contain Him Whom naught 
can contain. Having given birth to Him in a manner transcending nature and all 
telling, beseech Him, О Lady, to be merciful unto all. 
 
On Saturday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, * O ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
And for the Departed, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
 Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
Another, for the departed: 
Communion Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to 
Thyself, O Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
