--- PAGE 1 ---
TONE SIX 
ON SATURDAY EVENING 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera: 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Victorious over Hades, O Christ, * Thou didst ascend the Cross * that Thou 
mightest raise up with Thyself * those who sat in the darkness of death; * free 
among the dead, * Thou didst pour forth life from Thine own light. ** O all-
powerful Savior, have mercy upon us.  
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Victorious over Hades, O Christ, * Thou didst ascend the Cross * that Thou 
mightest raise up with Thyself * those who sat in the darkness of death; * free 
among the dead, * Thou didst pour forth life from Thine own light. ** O all-
powerful Savior, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Today Christ, having trampled on death, * hath arisen as He foretold, * 
granting joy to the world, * that we may all shout aloud the hymn and say: * O 
Source of life, O unapproachable Light, * O all-powerful Savior, ** have mercy 
upon us. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Where shall we sinners escape Thee, O Lord, * who art present in all creation? 
* In heaven? Thou dwellest there. * In Hades? There Thou didst trample on 
death. * In the depths of the sea? Thy hand is also there O Master. * To Thee we 
flee and falling down before Thee we implore: ** O Lord risen from the dead, 
have mercy upon us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Meet it is in truth to bless thee, the Theotokos. For the Creator of all, entering 
into thy most pure womb, became flesh, without changing in nature, or nor the 
appearance of dispensation, but having united Himself hypostatically and 
rationally to flesh with a soul, which He received from thee. Hence, we piously 
distinguish between both revealed natures. Him do thou entreat, O most pure and 
honored one, that He send down upon us peace and great mercy. 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Then “O Joyous Light ...,”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,”:  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VI:  
Thy Resurrection O Christ our Savior, * The angels in the heavens hymn; * 
grant also unto us who are here on earth ** to glorify Thee with pure hearts. 
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation. 
O most pure one, * thou who art the joy of all who are afflicted, * the 
protector of the wronged, the sustenance of those in need, * the staff of the blind, 
the visitation of the sick, * the shelter and assistance of the oppressed, the helper 
of orphans * and the Mother of the Most High. * Hasten, we beseech thee, ** to 
deliver thy servants. 
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget 
thine own people and thy father’s house. 
Without restraint I have committed every iniquity, * without limit every sin, * 
wretch that I am; * I have become worthy of every condemnation. * Grant me, O 
Virgin, the means of repentance, * that I may appear uncondemned. * For I have 
appointed thee as my intercessor, * and I call thee my protector. * Do thou not 
put me to shame, ** O Bride of God. 
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance. 
We have no other refuge unto our Creator and Master but thee, * O pure 
Bride of God. * With thy fervent protection do not cast us away; * do not put us 
to shame ** who with love hasten under thy shelter. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Come, all ye nations, and with voices of rejoicing let us praise the most holy 
Virgin and Theotokos, the crucible of human nature, the workshop of ineffable 
miracles; for new things have come to pass through her: the Beginningless hath 
taken on a beginning, the Word hath received substance, God hath become a 
man, that He might make man divine, not by altering nature, but through an 
Hypostatic union. For He alone proceedeth forth with, and is known in, two 
indivisible and differing natures, both perfect in will and activity, whereby Christ 
our God hath Himself given surety of the truth of the dispensation of salvation, 
granting the world cleansing, peace and great mercy. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VI: 
 The angelic hosts were before Thy tomb, * the guards became as dead men, * 
and Mary stood in the sepulcher looking for Thy pure body. * Thou didst despoil 
Hades, for Thou wast not tempted by it. * Thou didst come and meet the Virgin 
to give life. ** O Lord, Who didst rise from the dead, glory to Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
And the Dismissal. 
  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the 
saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank. 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
Victorious over Hades, O Christ, * Thou didst ascend the Cross * that Thou 
mightest raise up with Thyself * those who sat in the darkness of death; * free 
among the dead, * Thou didst pour forth life from Thine own light. ** O all-
powerful Savior, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Today Christ, having trampled on death, * hath arisen as He foretold, * 
granting joy to the world, * that we may all shout aloud the hymn and say: * O 
Source of life, O unapproachable Light, * O all-powerful Savior, ** have mercy 
upon us. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Where shall we sinners escape Thee, O Lord, * who art present in all creation? 
* In heaven? Thou dwellest there. * In Hades? There Thou didst trample on 
death. * In the depths of the sea? Thy hand is also there O Master. * To Thee we 
flee and falling down before Thee we implore: ** O Lord risen from the dead, 
have mercy upon us. 
Other Stichera by Anatolius: 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
We boast in Thy Cross, O Christ, * and we hymn and glorify Thy 
Resurrection; * for Thou art our God; ** we know none other besides Thee. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Ever blessing the Lord * we hymn His Resurrection; * for having endured the 
Cross, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Glory to Thy power, O Lord, * for Thou hast destroyed the one that held the 
might of death; * Thou hast renewed us through Thy Cross, ** granting us life 
and incorruption. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thy burial, O Lord, * smashed and rent asunder the bonds of Hades; * Thy 
Resurrection from the dead hath enlightened the world. ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion Dogmatic: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth 
timelessly from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure 
one; * By nature He is God, by nature for our sakes, He hath become a man * not 
divided into two Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * 
Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Thy Resurrection O Christ our Savior, * The angels in the heavens hymn; * 
grant also unto us who are here on earth ** to glorify Thee with pure hearts. 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Thou as all-powerful God hast smashed the gates of brass and shattered the 
bars of Hades, * and Thou hast raised the fallen human race. * Therefore with one 
accord we also cry out to Thee: ** O Lord, risen from the dead, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
Wishing to restore us from our ancient fall, * Christ wast nailed to a Cross and 
placed in a tomb. * The myrrh-bearing women, as they sought Him with tears, 
said, lamenting: * Alas, O Savior of all, how is it that Thou deigned to dwell in a 
tomb? * How is it, that Thou who willingly dwelt there, hast been stolen? * How 
is it that Thou hast been moved? * What place hath hidden Thy life-bearing body? 

--- PAGE 6 ---
* O Master, as Thou hast promised, * do Thou appear unto us, and bring to an 
end our grieving and our tears. * But as they lamented an angel cried unto them 
saying: * End your lament! Go and tell the apostles that the Lord hath risen, ** 
granting the world pardon and great mercy. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, * O Lord, unto length of days. 
Thou wast willingly crucified O Christ, * and by Thy burial Thou hast 
despoiled death. * On the third day Thou didst rise as God in glory, ** granting 
the world everlasting life and Thy great mercy. 
 Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Christ the Lord, my Creator and Redeemer, * Who came forth from thy womb, 
O most pure one, * and clothed Himself in my nature, * hath freed Adam from 
the primal curse. * Wherefore, like the angel * we unceasingly cry out to thee, O 
all-pure one, * who art truly the Mother of God and Virgin: * Rejoice!, O 
Sovereign Lady, ** the intercession, protection and salvation for our souls! 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, Full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, ** 
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...,” 
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast 
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O 
Theotokos and Virgin ...,” (Twice), and the Troparion of the feast (Once). 
And the Dismissal. 
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once): 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VI: 
The angelic hosts were before Thy tomb, * the guards became as dead men, * 
and Mary stood in the sepulcher looking for Thy pure body. * Thou didst despoil 
Hades, for Thou wast not tempted by it. * Thou didst come and meet the Virgin 
to give life. ** O Lord, Who didst rise from the dead, glory be to Thee.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
Gideon hath foretold of thy conception, * and David hath revealed thine 
ineffable child-bearing, * O Theotokos; * for the Word descended like a dew upon 
the fleece of thy womb, * and thou O Virgin Full of grace, * like unto a holy and 
fertile earth, ** budded forth without seed our salvation, Christ God. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
SATURDAY NIGHT: TONE VI 
 AT COMPLINE 
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee, 
our God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord, 
have mercy (12 times). Glory ..., Both now ..., O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice). 
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, O God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto 
helping me...); and Psalm 142 (O Lord, hear my prayer...). Then, Glory to God in 
the highest..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God...). 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VI: 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
In that thou art possessed of abundant divine grace, O Mother unwedded, 
disdain not those who have recourse unto thee, ever saving them from 
misfortunes and tribulations. 
Lo! the time of despair hath arrived for me. Arise, O most pure Lady, and 
extend unto me thy helping hand; for thou hast filled the world with divine 
gladness. 
Glory ..., As thou art our ally, O Birthgiver of God, quickly grant thy mighty 
protection unto me who am beset by perils, and preserve me unharmed by them. 
Both now ..., Death rusheth headlong upon my soul, and the temptations of 
those who hate me have surrounded me like adders, to destroy me; but do thou 
save me, O Theotokos. 
ODE III 
Irmos: My mouth hath been enlarged against mine enemies, * for in the 
Lord * hath my heart been established. 
In that thou hast given birth to Life, O Theotokos, enliven my soul, which 
hath been slain by transgressions. 
From every temptation preserve those who have recourse unto thee, O 
Theotokos, our hope. 
Glory ..., Save me from those perils which rise up bitterly against me, O most 
immaculate Mother of my Lord. 
Both now ..., O thou who by thy divine birthgiving dost grant salvation to the 
world, deliver me from misfortunes. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. * 
How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * and 
he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord. 
The strength of my soul hath grown weak through poverty, O Birthgiver of 
God, and the cruel darkness which ariseth from transgressions hath fallen upon 
me; but as thou art the light-bearing cloud of God, look down and illumine me, I 
pray. 
As thou art a calm haven, O all-immaculate one, transform the storms of mine 
evil deeds and the tumult of my transgressions into the tranquility of salvation, 
for, roaring like lions, they seek to slay me. Deliver me from destruction by them, 
I pray. 
Glory ..., As thou art steadfast salvation and invincible protection day and 
night, on land and at sea, and in every place, O Theotokos, save me; for after God 
it is in thee that we Christians truly place our trust. 
Both now ..., From great and divers transgressions and dangers thou dost ever 
save me; wherefore, I entreat thee who hast given birth to the Lord, and I hasten 
to thee, the invincible aid of the sorrowful; By thy prayers lead me up from 
misfortunes! 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Christ Who shineth Thy light upon the world, * illumine my heart 
* for I cry out to Thee in the night, * and save me. 
Unafraid of the assaults of men, we glorify thee, the shelter of salvation, O all-
immaculate Mother of the Word. 
Having thee as an unassailable rampart, O most pure one, we are delivered 
from the uprisings of temptations and grief. 
Glory ..., Rescue me from the tongue of evil men, O pure one, for they have 
sharpened it like a razor, to wreak bitter destruction upon my soul. 
Both now ..., Earnestly do I fall down before thee, praying: As thou art the 
Mother of my Creator, free me from the misfortunes which encompass me. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Slain by the sea-monster of sin, * I cry unto Thee, O Christ: * Free 
me from corruption, * as Thou didst the prophet. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Tasting bitterness, I have become a stranger to divine sweetness, O most pure 
one; wherefore, I cry unto thee: Grant me thy help. 
The darkness of the passions hath made me the slave of corruption; 
wherefore, free me, O Lady who hast given birth to the Light. 
Glory ..., With harmonious faith I confess thee, O most pure one, and, 
delivered from sorrow by thee, I offer thee sacrifice. 
Both now ..., The mouths of the unjust have been opened against me, O Lady; 
wherefore, as thou art my helper, free me quickly from them. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
O unashamed intercession for Christians, sure mediation before the Creator: 
Disdain not the cries of entreaty of Christians, but, in that thou art good, come 
thou to the aid of us who cry out to thee with faith: Haste thou to supplication 
and speed thou to entreaty, O Theotokos, ever interceding for those who honor 
thee. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
O most holy Virgin, do thou thyself free my soul from the temptations which 
have now surrounded it like fat bulls. 
Earnestly defending those in misfortune and grief, O Theotokos, ever grant 
them joy. 
Glory ..., As thou art an indestructible shelter for all, O Virgin, protect me who 
am wholly overcome by grief and despair for my deeds. 
Both now ..., By thine intercession are we delivered from misfortunes and 
sorrows, and we find great riches which are inexhaustible. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Consumed am I by the afflictions of men, O Theotokos, and I pray: Deliver 
me from their vain counsel. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
I have been vanquished in grief by my temptations, O Lady, and I pray: 
Preserve me unharmed by them. 
Glory ..., O pure one, save me from the lying man, from his tongue, mouth 
and tyranny, and from all want. 
Both now ..., Led astray is my character, and, as I have no response, I cry to 
the Theotokos: Deliver me from all evils. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Virgin who received the angel’s salutation * and hast given birth 
to thine own Creator, * save those who magnify thee. 
Be thou merciful unto me amid the griefs of life, O Theotokos, and save me 
from misfortunes who now flee unto thee.  
Truly thou, alone upon the earth and the sea, hast been shown to be an 
indestructible shelter for those who flee to thee with unwavering soul. 
Glory ..., By thine supplications, O all-hymned one, do thou grant freedom 
unto me who have mindlessly become a slave through all manner of evil falls. 
Both now ..., Having acquired thee as my hope and steadfast help, O pure one, 
I bring this hymn to an end with faith, magnifying thee as the Theotokos. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE VI 
AT NOCTURNS 
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...,” and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee, 
our God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King... Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 
times), Glory..., Both now..., O come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have 
mercy on me, O God...) 
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof is 
“I offer a sixth hymn unto Thee, O Godhead,” the composition of Metrophanes, 
Tone VI: 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
Refrain: O most holy Trinity our God, glory be to Thee! 
We hymn the three divine Hypostases, the immutable form of the single 
nature, the good God and Lover of mankind, Who granteth us cleansing of our 
transgressions. 
O transcendent One, O Lord thrice-resplendent in Thy characters, Who art in 
a single Godhead: Grant us understanding, and grant us Thy divine radiance. 
Glory ..., Paul, who adorned the Church of the nations as it were a bride, hath 
taught us to worship Thee, the one God in three Hypostases, by Whom, through 
Whom and in Whom all things have come into being. 
Both now ..., The noetic Sun issued forth from thy womb, O Theotokos, 
illumining us with the rays of the thrice-radiant Godhead; and hymning Him, we 
piously call thee blessed. 
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
Having adorned the ranks of heaven, O thrice-radiant God, Thou didst 
appoint them to hymn Thee with thrice-holy voices. With them accept us also, 
who hymn Thy goodness. 
Hymning the one, immutable, threefold, single Godhead, possessing the same 
form, we pray fervently unto Thee, that Thou now send down upon us 
forgiveness of our many sins. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., O Father, beginningless Mind, O Word of God of like form with 
Him, and Thou, O Spirit, divine, good and upright: In that Thou art 
compassionate, preserve those who with faith hymn Thy might. 
Both now ..., Having become human in nature within thy womb, O pure one, 
my God destroyed the field of death. He alone hath freed our forefathers and 
mothers from their former condemnation. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Fulfilling the dispensation concerning us ...”: 
Look down from heaven, O God our Master, and behold our lowliness; and in 
that Thou art compassionate, O supremely good One Who lovest mankind, take 
pity on us: for from nowhere else can we hope to receive the forgiveness of the 
evils which we have committed. Wherefore, be Thou with us, and no one shall be 
against us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O pure Lady Theotokos, look down and behold the pangs of our wounds; and 
take pity, most pure one, and heal the burning of our conscience, bedewing it with 
thy mercy, and crying out to thy servants: I am with you, and no one shall be 
against you! 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Elevating the thoughts of those who hymn Thee, O thrice-radiant Unity, 
quickly uplift also their soul and heart, and grant unto them Thy radiance and 
effulgence. 
Change and transform me from all evil unto virtue, O only undepictable and 
immutable Trinity, and enlighten me with Thy rays. 
Glory ..., Taking thought before, Thou didst wisely form the ranks of the 
angels, the ministers of Thy goodness, O Unity in three Hypostases; and with 
them accept my praise. 
Both now ..., Assuming created human nature, God, Who by nature is 
uncreated and eternal, fashioned it anew in thy holy womb, O Ever-virgin 
Theotokos. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Pondering the essence of the Godhead, which is providential and salvific for 
all, which is thrice-radiant and One, O Master, we rise early unto Thee, asking 
forgiveness for our falls into sin. 
O God, consubstantial Trinity - beginningless Father, equally eternal Son, and 
Holy Spirit - make steadfast those who hymn Thee, and deliver them from all peril 
and affliction. 
Glory ..., Setting me aright with divine radiances, and ever guiding me to please 
Thy Godhead in three Hypostases, O Sun of glory, grant that I may share in the 
divine kingdom. 
Both now ..., O immutable Word of God, Who beareth and preserveth all with 
Thine almighty arm, protect and preserve those who glorify Thee, through the 
supplications of the Mother of God, who gave birth to Thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
Grant wisdom and understanding unto those who hymn Thee, O thrice-
radiant Godhead, and grant that all may be illumined by the rays of Thine 
illumining beauty and goodness. (Twice) 
Glory ..., O thrice-radiant, omnipotent and unapproachable Light, Who art 
indivisible in Thine essence, illumine the hearts of those who with faith praise Thy 
might, and give them wings to fly aloft to divine love. 
Both now ..., In thee did the almighty Lord of all manifestly make His abode, 
O Ever-virgin; and He hath taught mankind to worship the one, thrice-radiant 
form of the Godhead. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Spec. Mel.: “Fulfilling the dispensation concerning us ...”: 
O Father, Son and Holy Spirit, look down upon us who worship Thee with 
faith, and who, though we are clay, with the fiery beings glorify Thy might, O 
compassionate One; for we know no other God than Thee. And do Thou cry out 
unto those who hymn Thee: I am with you, and no one shall be against you! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Look upon us, O all-hymned Theotokos, let enlightenment shine upon the 
hearts of the darkened, and illumine thy flock, O most pure one; for whatsoever 
thou desirest, thou canst do, in that thou art the Mother of thy Creator. And do 
thou cry out unto those who pray to thee: I am with you, and no one shall be 
against you! 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
O thrice-radiant Unity of Hypostases, instill within me the firm resolve to keep 
and preserve Thy divine commandments, and to ever hymn Thee with faith, 
singing: O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
O ineffably single God, Who art hymned in the infinity of Thy nature, yet 
bearest the number of a trinity of Hypostases, preserve us all from divers 
temptations and evil circumstances. 
Glory ..., Manifestly and simply setting forth that which is distinct within the 
immutable Form, we glorify Thee, O Trinity, the consubstantial and co-eternal 
God, Who art one in essence and uncommingled in the characteristics of Thy 
Hypostases. 
Both now ..., In His love for mankind, the transcendent God manifestly 
assumed our substance from thy womb, O most pure one, and hath taught all to 
cry: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Quickly grant me cleansing of transgressions and deliverance from 
multifarious passions, O Trinity one in nature, Unity in three Hypostases, that I 
may glorify Thee throughout all ages. 
O thrice-radiant Unity, supremely good Trinity, in that Thou art a merciful 
God and art known as One Who willeth mercy, have mercy upon those who 
glorify Thy majesty. 
Glory ..., With faith let us glorify the Word, the equally eternal Light begotten 
of eternal Light of the Father, together with the Spirit, the Light which proceedeth 
from Light; and let us exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Both now ..., O most pure one, thou hast given birth to the almighty Word, 
Christ the Lord, the Physician of all, Who healeth the wounds of the first parents 
of all of us who supremely exalt Him throughout the ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Unable to gaze upon the beauty of Thy glory, O Master, the ranks of the 
cherubim, covering themselves with their wings, unceasingly utter hymnody to the 
Trinity, glorifying the tri-Hypostatic might of Thy single Godhead. 
O never-setting Sun, impart Thine effulgence unto the hearts of Thy servants, 
and enlighten their souls, and deliver them from their many transgressions, O 
Thou Who alone art All-merciful and in three Hypostases; and grant unto us 
Thine incorrupt life. 
Glory ..., O Divinity Who art Light equal in honor, three-sunned and 
luminous, illumine those who hymn Thee with faith, deliver them from dark 
transgressions, and grant unto them Thy most splendid habitations, in that Thou 
art supremely good. 
Both now ..., Thy Son wisely formed man in the beginning, O Virgin, and 
through thee renewed him who had become corrupt, O all-hymned one; and with 
the never-waning radiance of His divine light He hath filled all those who with 
faith glorify thee as the true Theotokos. 
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite:  
(which, is chanted every Sunday after the canon) 
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim 
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we 
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day. 
With divine songs let us all in godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and the 
Spirit divine, the Might in three Hypostases, the one Sovereignty and Dominion, 
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in 
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all. 
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable 
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity. 
I worship God: the beginningless Father, the Son Who is equally without 
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified 
Essence, the threefold Unity. 
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, O my God in three 
Hypostases, Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and 
unshakable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory. 
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who ineffably became 
incarnate from the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and 
the angelic armies glorify Him. 
The rest of Nocturns, and the Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VI: 
The angelic hosts were before Thy tomb, * the guards became as dead men, * 
and Mary stood in the sepulcher looking for Thy pure body. * Thou didst despoil 
Hades, for Thou wast not tempted by it. * Thou didst come and meet the Virgin 
to give life. ** O Lord, Who didst rise from the dead, glory be to Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Both now ..., The 
Theotokion, in Tone VI, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion): 
Gideon hath foretold of thy conception, * and David hath revealed thine 
ineffable child-bearing, * O Theotokos; * for the Word descended like a dew upon 
the fleece of thy womb, * and thou O Virgin Full of grace, * like unto a holy and 
fertile earth, ** budded forth without seed our salvation, Christ God. 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VI: 
While the tomb lay open and Hades lamented, * Mary, cried unto the apostles 
who were in hiding saying: * “Come forth, ye workers of the vineyard, * proclaim 
unto the world the word of the Resurrection, * for the Lord is risen, ** granting 
the world His great mercy!” 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
Mary Magdalene stood by Thy tomb O Lord, * and mistaking Thee for the 
gardener, * weeping she cried aloud unto Thee: * “Where hast Thou hidden the 
Life eternal? * Where hast Thou placed He who sitteth on the cherubic throne? * 
For those who were guarding Him have become as dead men through fear. * 
Either give me my Lord or cry out with me: * O Thou Who wast numbered 
among the dead and hast raised the dead, ** glory be to Thee!” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Gideon hath foretold of thy conception, * and David hath revealed thine 
ineffable child-bearing, * O Theotokos; * for the Word descended like a dew upon 
the fleece of thy womb, * and thou O Virgin Full of grace, * like unto a holy and 
fertile earth, ** budded forth without seed our salvation, Christ God. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VI: 
Life was laid in the tomb * and a seal was set upon the stone; * the soldiers 
stood guarding Christ like a sleeping King; ** and having invisibly struck His foes 
the Lord arose. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
Jonah foretold of Thy tomb, and Symeon revealed Thy divine arising, * O 
immortal Lord; * for Thou didst descend as one dead into the tomb, * and having 
smashed the gates of Hades, * Thou didst arise without corruption as Master, for 
the salvation of all the world, * O Christ our God, ** enlightening those lying in 
darkness. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Virgin Theotokos, entreat thy Son Christ our God, * Who was willingly 
nailed upon the Cross, * and hath freed the world from deception, ** that He 
have mercy upon our souls!  
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses): 
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia, 
alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy 
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
 (On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays, 
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon ...,”) 
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the 
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the 
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a great 
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos. 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself 
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said 
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; * 
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, 
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, 
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, 
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living 
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy 
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O 
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from 
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God 
and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany and: 
The Sessional Hymn: 
By Thy voluntary and life-giving death, O Christ, * Thou hast shattered the 
gates of Hades, * and as God Thou hast opened unto us the paradise of old; * and 
by arising from the dead, ** Thou hast delivered our lives from corruption. 
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon: 
Unto heaven I raise my eyes, * even unto Thee, O Word; * do Thou have pity 
on me, ** that I may live for Thee. 
Have mercy upon us * who are filled with contempt O Word, * repairing Thy 
broken vessels ** that we may be found useful. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit is the cause of all salvation, * if He seeth fit to breathe on 
one of His creatures, * He swiftly raiseth him from the things of this earth, and 
having given him wings, ** maketh him to flourish and raiseth him on high. 
2nd Antiphon: 
If the Lord had not dwelt among us, * none could have withstood the attacks 
of the enemy, * for those who are victorious ** are exalted by Him. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Let not my soul be taken like a sparrow by their teeth, O Word; * Woe unto 
me! * how shall I, the lover of sin, ** be delivered from the power of the enemy? 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit all find divine inspiration, * goodness, understanding, peace 
and blessing; * for He is equal in activity ** to the Father and the Word. 
3rd Antiphon: 
They that put their trust in the Lord * look upon high * and are thus fearful to 
their foes ** and wondrous to all mankind. 
Unto the pursuit of iniquities * the righteous stretch not the hands, * having 
Thee, O Savior, ** as their helper. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit is sovereignty over all creation; * Him the armies of hosts 
above worship * and by everything that hath breath below ** is He worshiped. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: O Lord, stir up Thy might * and come to save 
us. 
The Verse: O Shepherd of Israel, attend, Thou that leadest Joseph like a 
sheep. 
Let every breath ...,  
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath 
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * 
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, 
** and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” Then the Canons: 
Resurrection Canons Tone VI. 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
With Thy hands stretched out upon the Cross, O most compassionate Jesus, 
Thou hast filled all things with the Father’s good will; wherefore we all sing to 
Thee a song of victory.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
As a bidden slave, death approached Thee with fear and trembling, for Thou, 
O Sovereign Lord of life, hast granted unto us eternal life and resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having received thy Maker ineffably incarnate within thy seedless 
womb, as He Himself hath willed, thou hast been revealed, O pure one, as truly 
the Sovereign Lady of all creation. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection:  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Standing voluntarily before Pilate’s judgment-seat, the Judge is unlawfully 
accused, and is smitten upon the face by a wicked hand as one condemned, He 
who is the God before Whom tremble both things on earth and those of heaven. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Stretching Thy divine hands upon Thine incorrupt and life-bearing Cross, O 
Savior, Thou hast gathered together the nations who adore Thy glorious 
crucifixion, O Lord, unto a perfect knowledge of Thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: At Thy Cross, O Savior, the all-immaculate one stood beholding 
the drops of blood falling from Thy side, and shedding fountains of tears she 
glorified Thine incomparable compassion, O Christ. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Partaking of the forbidden fruit in the garden, Eve brought about the curse, 
but O pure one, thou hast undone this by giving birth to Christ, the Origin of all 
blessings. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O pure one, having given birth to Christ, the brightness of the divine lightning, 
disperse thou by the light of thy radiance, the foggy mist of my passions and the 
confusion wrought by my transgressions. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
God, the Hope of all the nations, whom Jacob contemplated with the noetic 
eyes of his mind, hath become incarnate of thee, delivering us by thine 
intercessions. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The princes of the tribe of Judah have disappeared, for thy Son and God, O 
most pure one, hath descended as Lord, and hath been truly enthroned as King 
over all the ends of the earth. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Seeing God crucified in the flesh, all creation quaked from fear, but was held 
fast by the sustaining hand of Him Who was crucified for our sake. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Death, having been despoiled by death, doth lie miserably breathless, for 
unable to endure the revelation of divine Life, the mighty one hath been slain and 
resurrection hath been bestowed upon all.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The wonder of thy divine childbirth, O pure one, surpasseth all 
that is natural, for above nature hast thou conceived God in thy womb, and in 
giving birth remained Ever-virgin. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Remaining three days in the grave, Thou didst raise with Thy life-giving arising 
those that were slain from all ages, and now freed from condemnation, they 
joyously exult and cry aloud: “Behold, Thou O Lord hast come as our Redeemer.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Glory to Thine awaking, O our Savior, for as All-powerful Thou hast delivered 
us from Hades, corruption, and death, wherefore hymning Thee we cry aloud: 
“There is none as holy as Thee, O Lord, Lover of mankind.”  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Seeing Him Who was born of thee pierced through with a lance, 
O most holy all-immaculate one, thy heart was also pierced, wherefore thou didst 
exclaim in bewilderment: “What hath this most wicked people rendered unto 
Thee, O Child?” 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Having ineffably taken my temporal and mortal flesh from thy womb, O all-
pure Theotokos, the good One hath made it incorruptible, forever uniting it unto 
Himself. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Seeing God becoming incarnate of thee, O Virgin, the choirs of angels were 
amazed, and honor thee as the Theotokos in never-silent hymns. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The prophet Daniel was astonished when contemplating thee O Theotokos, 
the spiritual mount from which a stone hath been cut without hands, and which 
mightily despoileth the temples of the demons. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Neither the word, nor tongue of man, can worthily praise thee, O Virgin, for 
from thee, O most pure one, Christ the Giver of life hath deigned to become 
incarnate without seed. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
The Tree hath blossomed forth with true life, O Christ, for the Cross hath 
been raised and soaked with the blood and water from Thine incorruptible side, 
sprouting forth life unto us. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
No longer doth the serpent deceitfully entice me with false deification, for 
Christ, the divine Creator of human nature, hath now opened unto me without 
restriction the path of life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Truly unutterable and incomprehensible are the mysteries of thy 
divine birthgiving, O Theotokos, both unto those on earth and those in heaven, O 
Ever-virgin. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
We venerate Thine honorable Cross and nails, O Christ, and the holy spear, 
with the reed and the crown of thorns, by which we were delivered from the 
corruption of the Hades. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O Savior, the grave didst accept Thee, Who for our sake didst willingly endure 
death, but it was not possible for it to hold Thee, O Word, for as God Thou hast 
arisen, saving our race. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Ever-virgin Birthgiver of God, thou who hast brought forth 
Christ the Savior for mankind’s sake, do thou deliver from dangers and torments 
those who in faith have recourse to thy divine protection. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thee do we hymn, O most pure one, for having been saved by thee, we sing 
unto thee crying aloud: “Blessed art thou, O Ever-virgin, who hath given birth to 
God.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O most blessed Virgin, who hath brought forth unto those lying in the gloomy 
darkness of life, the never-fading Light resplendent in the flesh, do thou grant 
unto those who hymn thee, O Ever-virgin, ever-flowing gladness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Grace hath blossomed forth, and the law hath ceased through thee, O all-holy 
one; for thou art pure, and hast given birth to the Lord Who granteth us 
forgiveness, O Ever-virgin. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Partaking of the forbidden fruit in the garden brought death to me, O most 
pure one, but the Tree of life that issued forth from thee hath raised me up again, 
and made me an heir of the sweet things of paradise. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Now the cherubim hinder me not, and the flaming sword, O Master, hath 
been turned back, since they saw Thee, the true God, O Word of God, making a 
way into paradise for the thief. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
No longer do I fear returning unto the earth, O Master Christ; for in Thy great 
compassion Thou hast led me, the utterly forgotten one, from the lowest earth to 
the heights of incorruption, through Thy Resurrection.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O blessed Sovereign Lady of the world, save those who from 
their soul confess thee to be the Theotokos; for in thee we possess an invincible 
protection, O true Mother of God. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Tempted with the fruit of the tree in Eden, O exceedingly-good Lord, and 
disobeying Thy commandment, the forefather hath slid into corruption, but 
through Thy Cross Thou hast raised him up again to blessedness, O Savior, 
having been obedient to the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
By Thy death, O good One, the dominion of death hath been destroyed, and 
the source of life hath issued forth, bestowing immortality upon us; wherefore in 
faith we adore Thy burial and resurrection, by which Thou, as God, hast 
enlightened the whole world. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Theotokion: Abiding in the heavens the Lord and Maker of all that is, ineffably 
entered thy womb, O all-immaculate one, glorifying thee as incomparably higher 
than the heavens and holier than all the bodiless powers; therefore we on earth, 
bless thee. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Radiant with purity O all-hymned one, thou didst become the divine dwelling 
of the Master, for thou alone hath been revealed as the Mother of God, having 
carried Him as an infant in thine arms. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Filled with the spiritual adornments of thine exceedingly comely soul, thou 
wast revealed as the Bride of God, sealed with the modesty of thy virginity and 
enlightening the world with the brightness of thy purity. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Let the assembly of the wicked lament, those who do not openly proclaim 
thee as the pure Mother of God, for thou hast appeared unto us as a radiant gate 
of divine light scattering the darkness of sins. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Crucified O Master, by the nails Thou hast annulled the curse that weighed 
upon us, and pierced with the lance in Thy side, Thou hast torn up the charges 
laid against Adam, thereby freeing the world. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Smitten deceitfully, Adam was led down to the bowels of Hades, but Thou 
Who by nature art both God and Compassionate, in Thy desire to recall him, 
didst carry him upon Thy shoulders, raising him up together with Thyself.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O most holy Sovereign-Lady, who hath brought forth the Lord 
Pilot for the sake of all mankind, do thou calm the ever-changing and frightful 
surging of my passions and grant peace to my heart. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
The Hebrew multitude have been revealed as slayers of Christ and the 
prophets, for just as of old, they feared not to kill the prophets who revealed the 
mysterious emanations of truth, so now, carried away by envy, they have slain the 
Lord, Whom the prophets once preached, however His death hath become for us 
our life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou wast confined but not detained in the tomb, O Savior, for though 
willingly suffering death, O Word, Thou didst arise as God immortal, awakening 
together with Thee those held captive in Hades, and unto the women, exchanging 
their former sorrow for gladness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: At the time of Thy Passion Thy bodily nature appeared more 
shameful and disdainful than that of any man, but Thy divine nature wast revealed 
unto David as the fairest of all in comeliness, saying: “With the scepter of Thy 
kingdom the strength of Thine enemies hath been destroyed”; wherefore the most 
pure one spake unto Thee saying: “O my Son and God, arise from the grave.” 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Moses, the greatest amongst the prophets, described thee beforehand as an ark 
and table, a candlestick and golden pot, symbolizing the incarnation of the Most 
High from thee, O Virgin Mother. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
As a consequence of their attack upon thine Offspring, O Sovereign Lady, 
death hath been slain, and corruption, the curse of Adam, hath been abolished, 
for thou hast given birth to the Life that delivereth from corruption those who 
hymn thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The law becometh powerless and the shadow of the law passeth away when, 
above all understanding and comprehension, the grace of the childbirth of our 
God and Savior hath appeared unto me, O greatly hymned Virgin.  
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone VI: 
Having raised all the dead from the valleys of darkness * by His life-giving 
hand, * Christ our God hath granted resurrection to the race of mankind. * For 
He is the Savior of all, * the Resurrection and the Life ** and the God of all.  

--- PAGE 27 ---
Ikos: We the faithful hymn and adore Thy Cross and burial, O Life-giver, for 
Thou, O Immortal One, as all-powerful God hast bound Hades and raised the 
dead together with Thee, shattering the gates of death and laying low the power of 
Hades; wherefore we, the earth-born, with love glorify Thee Who, as God of all, 
hath arisen, overthrowing the destructive dominion of the enemy, and raising all 
those who believed in Thee, delivering the world both from the darts of the 
serpent and the wiles of the adversary. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Lamenting Thy Passion, O Master, the sun wrapped itself in darkness casting 
gloom upon all the earth, which cried aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
At Thy descent, O Christ, the lowest depths of Hades were encompassed with 
light, and the forefather, exalting and full of joy, sprung up crying: “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Through thee, O Virgin Mother, the effulgent Light hath 
appeared unto all the world, for thou hast brought forth God the Creator of all; 
entreat Him, O most pure one, to send down upon us the faithful, great mercy. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O strange spectacle! He Who hath delivered Israel from Pharaoh’s bondage is 
now of His own will crucified by them, loosing the bonds of sin; unto Him do we 
in faith sing: “O God the Redeemer, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The children of the wicked one have crucified on Calvary the Savior who hath 
smashed the doorposts and gates of brass, for the salvation of us who sing: “O 
God the Redeemer, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Theotokion: Having wrought the deliverance of Eve, O pure Virgin, thou hast 
freed Adam from the ancient curse; wherefore together with the angels we hymn 
thee and thy Son, crying aloud: “O God the Redeemer, blessed art Thou.” 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The furnace did not harm the three youths, thus prefiguring thy childbirth; for 
the divine Fire dwelt within thee without consuming thee, teaching all to cry 
aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
As thou didst prophesy, O all-pure Mother, the ends of the universe call thee 
blessed; for enlightened with the luminous beams of thy comeliness and grace, 
they make melody singing: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The most cunning serpent hath plunged its destructive teeth into me, O 
Theotokos, but thy Son hath smashed them and given me the strength to cry 
aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou art the cleansing of our nature, O blessed of God, for having carried in 
thine arms God, Who sitteth on the shoulders of the cherubim, thou dost cry 
aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The Jewish people who slew the prophets of old, from envy hath now made 
themselves slayers of God, raising upon the Cross O Word of God, Thee Whom 
we exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Abandoning not the Heavenly realms, while descending into Hades, O Christ, 
Thou hast raised together with Thyself fallen mankind, who exalteth Thee 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Theotokion: From Light thou hast conceived the Giver of Light, the Word of 
God, ineffably bringing Him forth, for the divine Spirit dwelt within thee, 
wherefore thou art glorified O maiden, and we magnify thee throughout all ages. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Every ear doth tremble upon hearing how the Most High, by His Cross and 
burial, willingly descended to earth to destroy the dominion of Hades, awakening 
all therein that they may cry aloud: “O ye youths bless, ye priests hymn, and ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The tyranny of Hades hath ceased and its dominion is now scorned, for the 
God of all having been set upon the earth on the Cross, hath laid low its power; 
“O ye youths bless, ye priests hymn, and ye people, supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
How ineffable is Thy love for mankind, O Christ, and how unutterable Thy 
loving-kindness! For seeing me imprisoned and perishing in Hades, Thou dost 
endure the Passion thereby setting me free. Wherefore we bless Thee, O Master 
of all, and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Another, of the Theotokos:  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
With the illumination of the Spirit rendering thee resplendent as a Sovereign in 
golden vestments, thy Son hath placed thee, O most pure one, on His right hand; 
Him do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
He who by His own will established the world, hath taken flesh from thine 
undefiled womb, fashioning it from above; Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Through the union of the Word with my nature, thou hast become an abode 
of the Divinity, O most pure one, shining resplendently with the radiance of 
virginity, wherefore we hymn thee throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
The candlestick resplendent with gold prefigured thee who didst ineffably 
receive the Light unapproachable which illumineth all things with His knowledge. 
Wherefore we hymn thee, O pure one, throughout all ages. 
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant: 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
And then the appointed Katavasia: 
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat: 
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * 
as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou, O Word of God, didst remain dispassionate while dwelling in the 
passionate flesh, thereby freeing mankind from the passions, being Thyself a 
passion unto the passions, O our Savior, for Thou alone art passionless and All-
powerful. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Suffering the corruption of death, O Master, Thou hast preserved Thy body 
from corruption, and leaving not Thy life-giving divine soul in Hades, Thou didst 
arise as from sleep, raising us up also. 
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 
Trinitarian: We, the race of mankind with pure lips glorify and honor God the 
Father, the co-beginningless Son, and the ineffable and most glorious power of 
the All-holy Spirit; for Thou alone art All-powerful, O Trinity indivisible. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Although Thou didst descend into the grave as one dead, O Life-giver, Thou 
didst destroy the power of Hades, Thou didst raise together with Thyself, O 
Christ, those who were in bondage therein, and as God Thou dost grant 
resurrection unto all who with faith and love magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Let creation rejoice, delighting and blossoming forth like a lily, for as God, 
Christ is risen from the dead; wherefore let us cry aloud: “Death! where is thy 
sting? and Hades where thy victory? For the compassionate One Who hath 
exalted our horn, hath cast thee to the ground.”  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou hast borne Him Who doth bear everything, O most pure 
Sovereign Lady, and held in thine arms as an infant, Him Who delivereth us from 
the hand of the warring enemy, and beheld lifted upon the Tree of the Cross Him 
Who hath raised us up from the pit of corruption. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
A star resplendent with the radiance of the Godhead hath arisen from Jacob 
unto those who were held in darkness, for through thee, O all-pure one, Christ 
God hath now become the incarnate Word; enlightened by Him, we, with the 
heavenly hosts, call thee blessed. 

--- PAGE 32 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Strengthened by thy power and grace, I have set forth this hymn to thee from 
a fervent heart; do thou accept it, O pure Virgin, sending down in return from 
thine imperishable treasures, thy grace, O blessed one of God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou, O Virgin, hast been revealed as a divine loom, upon which the Word 
hath woven a covering of flesh, making my nature God-like, and putting it on He 
hath saved all those who with a pure mind magnify thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Resurrection hath now been bestowed upon the dead through thine 
unspeakable and ineffable birthgiving, O all-pure Theotokos, for having assumed 
flesh from thee, Life hath shone forth unto all, revealing the destruction of the 
corruption of death. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...,”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion (Svetilen). 
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to 
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the 
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion. 
On the Praises: “Let every breath ...,” 8 Stichera of the Resurrection, however, 
if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from the 
Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses. 
On the Praises, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VI: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
Thy Cross, O Lord, * is the Life and Resurrection of Thy people, * and 
trusting in it we sing Thy praises: ** O our risen God, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Thy burial, O Master, * hath opened paradise to mankind, * and thus delivered 
from corruption we sing Thy praises: ** O our risen God, have mercy upon us. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
With the Father and the Spirit * let us hymn Christ risen from the dead, * and 
let us cry out to Him: ** “Thou art our Life and Resurrection, have mercy upon 
us.” 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
On the third day Thou didst arise from the tomb, O Christ, * as it was written, 
* raising together with Thyself our forefather; ** therefore the race of mankind 
doth glorify Thee, and hymn Thy Resurrection. 
Other Stichera by Anatolius: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
O Lord, great and fearful is the mystery of Thy Resurrection; * for Thou 
camest forth from the tomb * like unto a bridegroom from His marriage chamber, 
* overcoming death by death, * and redeeming Adam. * Wherefore angels exult in 
heaven * and mankind here on earth ** doth glorify Thy compassion towards us, 
O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
O ye wicked Jews!, where are the seals, * and the pieces of silver that you 
handed to the watchmen? * The treasure was not stolen, but hath arisen as One 
almighty; * and Ye have been put to shame, who denied Christ, * the Lord of 
glory, who suffered and was buried * and arose on the third day; ** Him let us 
worship and glorify. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
While the stone was sealed, how were you robbed, O Jews? * Since you set 
guards and placed seals. * Yet while the doors were shut the King came forth. * 
Either bring forth His body, or worship Him as God, * and along with us chant: 
** “Glory, O Lord, to Thy Cross and holy Resurrection!” 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
The myrrh-bearing women came lamenting to Thy life-bearing grave, O Lord, 
* carrying sweet smelling spices, * seeking to anoint Thy most pure body; * but 
instead they found a radiant angel seated upon the stone, * and He addressed 
them saying. * “Why weep ye for the One who hath poured forth life from His 
side for the world’s sake? * Why seek ye the immortal One as a mortal in a grave? 
* Rather run ye, and tell His disciples the universal joy of His glorious 
Resurrection; * with which Thou hast enlightened us also, O Savior, ** grant unto 
us pardon and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel  
Note: If the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ the Eothinon is taken from 
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from Thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve 
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise 
we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, 
glory be to Thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Having risen from the tomb, and having burst the bonds of Hades, * Thou 
hast destroyed the sentence of death, O Lord, * delivering all from the snares of 
the enemy. * Manifesting Thyself to Thine apostles, Thou didst send them forth 
to preach; * and through them hast granted Thy peace to the world, ** O Thou 
Who alone art greatly merciful. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
Remember me, O God my Savior, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom, and 
save me, for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Through a tree Adam was deceived; through the Tree of the Cross Thou hast 
saved Him again, the thief who cried, “Remember me, O Lord, in Thy kingdom.” 
Thou hast smashed the gates and bars of Hades, O Giver of life, and Thou 
hast raised all the dead, O Savior, as they cried, “Glory to Thine arising.” 
Thou didst despoil death by Thy burial and fillest all things with joy by Thy 
Resurrection. Remember me O Lord, as Thou art compassionate. 
Myrrh-bearing women came to the grave and heard an angel cry aloud, “Christ 
hath risen, enlightening all things.” 
Let us all with one accord praise Christ, who was nailed to the Tree of the 
Cross and delivered the world from error. 
We glorify the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, chanting, “O Holy 
Trinity, save our souls!” 
Theotokion: O Virgin, who didst conceive ineffably in the last times, and hast 
given birth to thine own Creator, save those who magnify Thee. 
Troparion of the Resurrection, in Tone VI: 
The angelic hosts were before Thy tomb, * the guards became as dead men, * 
and Mary stood in the sepulcher looking for Thy pure body. * Thou didst despoil 
Hades, for Thou wast not tempted by it. * Thou didst come and meet the Virgin 
to give life. ** O Lord, Who didst rise from the dead, glory be to Thee.  
Kontakion of the Resurrection, in Tone VI:  
 Having raised all the dead from the valleys of darkness * by His life-giving 
hand, * Christ our God hath granted resurrection to the race of mankind. * For 
He is the Savior of all, * the Resurrection and the Life ** and the God of all.  
 
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Save, O Lord, Thy people; and bless Thine 
inheritance. 
The Verse: To Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God, keep Thou not silent 
toward me.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VI: He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High, under 
the shelter of the God of heaven shall abide.  
The Verse: He shall say to the Lord, Thou art my succor, and my refuge, 
my God, and I shall hope in Him. 
