--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE VI  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance,  
The composition of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The angelic hosts ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Through thought of contrition grant me tears of repentance, О Savior, that I 
may wash away the filth from my soul, which I have badly sullied, committing 
unrighteousness all the time, for it is for this that I have her who gave birth to 
Thee, and the angelic choirs, entreating Thy love for mankind, 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Come, О my soul, and repent of the many sins thou hast committed in this 
life, and entreat the multitude of the heavenly armies with sighs and tears, that 
time be given thee for repentance, lest thou be sent into the most accursed fire of 
Gehenna like the barren fig-tree. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Not one of Thy commandments have I kept on earth. When Thou shalt sit 
upon Thy throne, how shall I give answer for myself, receiving condemnation for 
all that I have done in knowledge or in ignorance, О my Christ? Wherefore, I cry 
out to Thee: Through the supplications of Thy servants save me, the prodigal! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy incorporeal angels, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Standing before Thy throne, the angelic hosts pray for the race of mankind, О 
Christ; wherefore, by their supplications grant peace unto all, and put down the 
audacity of the heathen. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
О all ye ranks of the angels, who ever dance round about the throne of the 
King of all, preserve us who call upon you with faith, and deliver us from 
torments. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
The Father Who is God over all, the only Word, and the Spirit, brought forth 
the hosts of heavenly intelligences, formless and immaterial, to hymn the glory of 
the triple Sun. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Theotokos, who at the sound of the archangel’s voice conceived in thy 
womb the Word, Who with the Father and the Spirit is equally beginningless, thou 
hast been revealed to be more exalted than the cherubim, seraphim and thrones. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 
our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VI: 
At Thy dread coming, О Christ, let us not hear “I know you not.” For we have 
set our hope upon Thee, О Savior. And even though in our neglect we have not 
kept Thy precepts, yet take pity on our souls, we pray.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Neither repentance nor tears have I acquired; wherefore, I beseech Thee, О 
Christ God: Convert me before the end, and grant me compunction, that I may be 
delivered from tortures.  
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Thy martyrs, O Lord, denied Thee not, nor did they forsake 
Thy commandments; by their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Like the Archangel, * let us the faithful hymn the bridal-chamber of heaven, * 
the portal truly sealed: * Rejoice, for whose sake hath budded forth unto us Christ 
the Savior of all, * the Bestower of life and God! * With thine arm O Lady * cast 
down the tyrants, our godless foes, * O most pure one, ** O thou hope of 
Christians!  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
SUNDAY NIGHT: TONE VI  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
Drive the cloud of the passions from my mind, О pure one, and shine light 
upon me, О most pure one who hast given birth to the Son, the Effulgence of the 
Father, that I may hymn thee. 
Come, ye people, and like Gabriel let us cry aloud to the Virgin with reverence 
of soul: Truly adorned art thou, О pure one who hast given birth to Joy! Rejoice, 
most pure one! 
Glory ..., The Son Who was dispassionately begotten of the Father before all 
ages didst thou in latter days bear in thy womb, О most pure one, giving birth to 
Him as both God and man. 
Both now ..., Without corruption thou hast given birth to the one God, and 
didst remain a virgin after giving birth, as thou wast before birthgiving, О most 
pure one; wherefore, we, the faithful, cry out to thee: Rejoice! 
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
There are none as immaculate as thee, О all- pure Theotokos, who hast given 
birth to the Creator and Master of all things; wherefore, all of us, the faithful, cry 
out to thee in thanksgiving: Rejoice! 
The cruel waves of the passions buffet me, О pure one, and I am truly cast 
into the abyss of evils by my many bitter falls. О pure one, extend to me a helping 
hand, and save me. 
Glory ..., Break through the darkness of my transgressions, О Virgin, and 
shine upon me the light of dispassion, О pure one who ineffably hast given birth 
to the intangible Sun. 
Both now ..., Having cleansed me of transgressions and defilement with the 
fire of the fear of God, О maiden, clothe me in the radiant vesture of the virtues 
and set me among the choirs of the saints. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
With thy radiance dispel the gloom of my many transgressions, О most 
immaculate Lady who hast given birth to the Light, Who hast shone upon the 
faithful the Sun of righteousness. 
In mine affliction I now set my hope on thee, О most pure one. Let me not 
depart from thee untreated, but rather rejoicing, having received salvation. 
Glory ..., О most pure one, grant thy rich compassions unto us who with faith 
and love have recourse to thy temple, and deliver us from all temptations and 
sorrows. 
Both now ..., The Word made His abode within thee, О most pure Lady, 
delivering the world from the mindlessness of the passions, and granting the 
kingdom of heaven unto those who hymn thee. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
With the divine radiance of Him who shone forth from thy womb do thou 
illumine my soul which sleepeth in darkness, О Virgin, and drive away the 
darkness of sin, illumining me with thy light. 
Heal thou my soul, which hath fallen among thieves, О good one, pouring 
forth the oil of mercy and the wine of thy tenderheartedness upon my wounds, 
granting me abundant understanding. 
Glory ..., Heal thou the infirmities of flesh and soul of us who have recourse 
to thee, О all-hymned one; for thou art the strength of those who flee beneath the 
shelter of thy supplication, O Birthgiver of God. 
Both now ..., The Holy Spirit of God, dwelling within thy womb, О most pure 
one, and overshadowing thee, showed thee to be the habitation of the Trinity, for 
at the Father’s good pleasure thou didst conceive the Son and give birth unto 
Him. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Dispel the gloom, of mine accursed soul, and shine upon me the light which 
shone forth from thy womb illumining all human nature, О most pure one. 
Deliver me from the assaults of enemies visible and invisible, О pure one, and 
grant me the mighty shelter of thine aid; for to thee, О Virgin, have I now fled. 
Glory ..., He Who created all things became incarnate through thy holy womb 
in the latter days and, setting aright human nature, which had grievously fallen 
through Adam, He hath restored the world. 
Both now ..., The majesty of the angels hymned thee, О most immaculate one, 
and I beseech thee: Drive from me the unseemly fantasies of the demons, 
preserving my heart in peace. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
The attacks of the adversary assail thine inheritance, О Lady. Set at naught 
their scheming, and cast their prideful arrogance down to the ground; for thou art 
the ally of those who entreat thee with faith. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Shedding unapproachable light upon me who am in the darkness of ignorance, 
О most pure one, guide me to the Light, that I may piously cry out to thy Son 
with faith: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
Drive the cloud of gloom from my soul, О Birthgiver of God, illumining me 
with the light of the Creator of all; for thou art the receptacle of the pre-eternal 
Light Who shone forth dispassionately from the Father. 
Glory ..., Incline thyself to our pleas, О pure Birthgiver of God, and in thy 
mercy be thou moved to entreat God, rendering Him merciful to us who ever 
place our hope in thee, О good one. 
Both now ..., Grant cleansing unto me who am defiled by the passions of 
wicked deeds, О pure one, and send me tear-drops to wash away the evil shame of 
my sin, the outpouring of filth. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
О maiden who hast given birth to the Master of all in the flesh, rescue me 
from the violence of the passions, and unite me to the Creator of all by love, that I 
may hymn Him throughout all ages. 
By thy visitation, О maiden, raise me up who lie upon the bed of pain, and 
grant health of body and soul unto me who hymn Christ throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., With the dew of thy supplications quench thou the flame of my pas-
sions, О Lady, and save me, as before thy Son saved the children who supremely 
exalted Him. 
Both now ..., I fear not the treachery of the foe, setting my hope and 
expectation upon thee, О good one; for thou dost ever help, saving those who 
praise thee from misfortunes. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
From all manner of evils deliver me who have recourse to thee with faith, О 
most pure Virgin, and grant health and deliverance from the wicked unto me who 
flee to thy protection, О maiden, that I may ever glorify thee with cries of 
thanksgiving. 
Thou hast abolished the curse of grief, О pure one, and hast poured forth joy 
upon the world through thy birthgiving, having borne the Well-spring of blessing. 
Wherefore, praising thee, the all-hymned one, all of us, the faithful, ever bless thee 
with thanksgiving. 
Glory ..., Thy womb became a receptacle of the Light Who shone forth from 
the Father before all ages, О all-hymned Birthgiver of God; wherefore, we all 
glorify thee, the Theotokos, and magnify Him as thy Son and God. 
Both now ..., When the divine Spirit had come upon thee, thou hast given 
birth in time to the timeless Son who shone forth from the Father; wherefore, 
with tongue and heart all of us, the faithful, confess thee to be the Theotokos who 
knewest not a man. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE VI  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VI: 
I think upon the dread day, and I weep over my wicked deeds. How shall I 
answer the immortal King? With what boldness shall I, the prodigal, lift mine eyes 
to the Judge? О compassionate Father, only-begotten Son and Holy Spirit: Have 
mercy on me! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
In the vale of weeping, in the place which Thou hast appointed, rebuke me 
not, О Merciful One, when Thou shalt come to render just judgment, neither 
shame me before the angels; but take pity on me, О God, and have mercy on me. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With heart and mouth let us hymn aloud the most glorious Mother of God, 
who is holier than the holy angels, confessing her to be the Theotokos, in that she 
truly gave birth to God incarnate, and prayeth unceasingly on behalf of our souls. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI: 
Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for at a loss for any plea, we 
sinners offer Thee our Master this supplication: Have mercy on us! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Have mercy on us, О Lord, for we have placed our hope in Thee. Be not 
angry with us greatly, neither remember Thou our iniquities; but look upon us 
now, as Thou art compassionate, and deliver us from our enemies. For Thou art 
our God, and we are Thy people. We are all the work of Thy hands, and we call 
upon Thy name. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel 
To the martyrs: Ever enlightened by Thee, and having extinguished the lamp 
of the infidels, like lamps the saints always shine forth light upon the righteous. 
Through their supplications, О our Savior, light Thou my lamp, and save me, О 
Lord. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Standing in the temple of Thy glory, we think we are standing in the heavens. 
О Theotokos, gate of heaven, open unto us the doors of thy mercy! 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The Hope ...”: 
I am in awe of the dread day of Thy coming, О Christ, I fear the inexorable 
judgment, and tremble, for I have committed a multitude offenses. But converting 
me before the end, save me, in that Thou art a merciful God, through the 
supplications of Thine angels, О only Compassionate Lover of mankind. 
О soul who hast spent thy whole life in slothfulness, unmindful of the day of 
dread judgment: Come to thy senses, and repent, and turn back and cry out to 
Christ: О Compassionate One, at the hour of condemnation be not mindful of 
our many offenses! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O good Birthgiver of God, hope, protection and haven of those who trust in 
thee, and intercessor for the world: With the incorporeal ones earnestly pray to 
the loving God to Whom thou hast given birth, that our souls may be delivered 
from every threat, О only blessed one. 
ODE I 
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ and His holy martyrs, the 
acrostic whereof is “Accept Thou the weeping of mine eyes, О Christ,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: The lecherous Pharaoh was drowned with all his warriors, * and 
Israel, crossing through the midst of the sea, * cried aloud exclaiming: * 
Let us chant unto the Lord God, * for He hath been glorified! 
Treating me with the oil of mercy, who have fallen into the hands of thieves 
and been half slain by soul-corrupting wounds, О Christ, have pity on me, that I 
may glorify Thee. 
I have sinned greatly, and become a den of thieves. О Christ Who wast born 
in a cave, grant me an outpouring of tears, and cleanse me, that I may become a 
temple for Thy Holy Spirit. 
To the martyrs: Having like youths cast down the enemy, О spiritual athletes, 
ye have truly been adorned with divinely plaited wreaths, and, full of glory, stand 
with the angels before God in the highest. 
To the martyrs: О honored great-martyrs, who once drowned the noetic 
Pharaoh in the deep of your blood, ye have passed over to the promised land of 
heaven, glorifying Christ. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Theotokion: With the martyrs, the divine prophets and all the angels pray to 
the Creator of all, О pure one, that He save those who with faith glorify and 
magnify thee. 
Another canon, of the holy incorporeal angels, the acrostic whereof is 
“This is the sixth hymning of the noetic beings,” the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone VI:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
I praise the beauteous majesty of the heavenly choirs, and cry aloud: I pray 
Thee, О Christ, Who alone art compassionate, may I be illumined by their radiant 
lightning. (Twice) 
Thou Who by Thy word and the most Holy Spirit adorned all things and the 
angelic choirs which Thou didst create, Thou hast created them to hymn Thee as 
the Cause of all, in that Thou art almighty. 
Theotokion: Having received thy Creator ineffably incarnate from thy seedless 
womb, as He Himself desired, О pure one, thou hast truly been revealed to be the 
Sovereign Lady of creation. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Having established my thoughts upon the firm rock of Thy Faith, * 
make steadfast my soul, О Lord; * for I have Thee as my refuge * and 
confirmation, * О good One. 
I promised Christ to repent, yet in nowise do I cast off evil deeds. What shall 
I do, who am beset by great blindness? О Son of God, have pity on me! 
Having wasted my life in slothfulness, wretch that I am, I consider the long-
suffering of God; and I am afraid that the severing of death will suddenly overtake 
me. 
To the martyrs: Desiring persecutions, pangs and tribulations as though they 
were food, the martyrs rejoiced, looking toward to everlasting delight with their 
neotic eyes. 
To the martyrs: All-wisely making your minds steadfast upon the firm rock of 
piety, О holy martyrs, in your strength ye were undaunted by multifarious 
wounds. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to us to be a new tree of paradise, О 
pure one, having in thy midst the Tree of which Adam, having eaten thereof, 
escapeth the mortality brought about by the evil one. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
He Who by His will created every rational being out of nothingness is 
worshipped in three Hypostases with thrice-holy hymns, and is eternally glorified. 
(Twice) 
О Master of all things, Who lovest mankind, now pouring forth and richly 
exuding good upon all things, Thou hast shown forth the choirs of the 
incorporeal angels through their partaking of blessedness. 
Theotokion: Because of thee hath release been given us, О Theotokos; for the 
Master of the law, incarnate from thee, endured suffering for our sake, delivering 
all mankind. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Thy virtue hath covered the heavens, О Christ, * and all things have 
been filled * with Thy praise, О Lord. 
Condemn us not, who have sinned greatly against Thee; but as Thou art 
merciful by nature have pity on us, О Master. 
О Savior Who art the way of life, grant that I may never follow the deadly 
ways of sin. 
To the martyrs: With your burning wounds ye quenched the fire, О martyrs 
who suffered, and through the dew of the divine Spirit ye remained unconsumed. 
To the martyrs: Having richly inherited it by the shedding of your blood, ye 
clearly delight in the torrent of divine sustenance, О martyrs. 
Theotokion: Having wasted my life in slothfulness, О most pure one, I flee to 
thine aid. Have pity, and save me! 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Possessed of a nature immune to corruption, Thy most divine and honorable 
intelligences stand round about Thy throne, having inherited Thee as a wellspring 
of immortality, О Lover of mankind. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Sanctified by the Holy Spirit, the assemblies of the angels remain immune to 
evil, deified for the primal and good ascent. 
Theotokion: The curse of our first mother hath been annulled because of thee, 
О all-immaculate one; since for our sake thou hast given birth to the ever-flowing 
Wellspring of blessing, O most pure one. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: О Christ Who shineth Thy light upon the world, * illumine my heart 
* for I cry out to Thee in the night, * and save me. 
О Christ Who didst spring forth from the root of Jesse, wither the uprisings of 
my passions, and plant the fear of Thee within me. 
Let us acquire sighs like the publican’s, and set aside all evil deeds, that we may 
escape everlasting sighing. 
To the martyrs: Wounded by divine desire for Thee, О Lord, Thy martyrs 
rejoiced when they were wounded by tortures. 
To the martyrs: Suffering in body, О martyrs, ye cried out from the ends of 
the earth, and Christ hearkened to your voice. 
Theotokion: Let us hymn the Theotokos, the gate of heaven, through which 
all sinners pass by the passage of repentance. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
Beholding Thee, our God and Creator, sitting upon the throne of the 
cherubim, О Thou Who seest all things, by signs the prophet learned Thy majesty 
and dominion. (Twice) 
Daniel beheld Thee, Who united Thyself to human form, surrounded by 
myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands of angels, О Master, and he 
learned the mystery of the dominion of Thy glory. 
Theotokion: Thy Son was revealed to be comely in beauty more than the 
children of mortals, О all-immaculate Lady; for the Word is God over all, even 
though He received human nature from thee. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Slain by the sea-monster of sin, * I cry unto Thee, О Christ: * Free 
me from corruption, * as Thou didst the prophet. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
О Christ having given eyes to the blind, open Thou the eyes of my soul, that I 
may behold Thy light and be delivered from the darkness of the passions. 
Make my soul full of the life-creating waters of repentance, О Compassionate 
One, granting me rivers of tears. 
To the martyrs: Like lilies of the valley the martyrs emit healings and fill with 
fragrance the hearts of all the pious. 
To the martyrs: Released from a corruptible body by tortures, О saints, ye 
bound yourselves to the Master with love and your hearts. 
Theotokion: О holy Mother of God, By thy prayers purify my heart, which 
hath been defiled by unclean deeds. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
Beholding with purity of mind Thine angels radiantly descending upon the 
ladder, О Master, from afar Jacob learned most clearly of Thy coming in the flesh. 
(Twice) 
Israel Thy favored one, О Master, rejoiced, perceiving the splendid and divine 
array of the angels, who join chorus in goodly ranks and stand round about Thine 
ineffable glory. 
Theotokion: The maiden and Lady hath been shown to be a mountain truly 
higher than the heavenly mountains, the angelic hosts; for she contained the 
radiance of Thy divinity. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Hearkening to the hymnody of Thy venerable children * Thou didst 
bedew the burning furnace: * О Lord God of our fathers blessed art Thou! 
I have been blinded in mind by grave evil, and have not looked upon the light 
of repentance. О Christ my Savior, save me! 
Trusting in thy tender compassion, I fall down before Thee, О Compassionate 
One, and ask for remission of mine evils. Disdain me not, О Master! 
To the martyrs: О my Christ, Who dost invest with heavenly glory those who 
suffer for Thee in the world: By their supplications save me. 
To the martyrs: As divine keepers of the righteous law, ye spat upon unjust 
edicts, suffering lawfully with faith. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the Master Who assumed the guise of a 
servant, О maiden. Him do thou entreat, О pure one, that He free me from 
slavery to the passions. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Drawing nigh to the ineffable glory of Christ, all the holy angels are made 
luminous by the beauty of the Almighty, and with love they ever sing unto Him: 
Blessed art Thou, О God, throughout the ages! (Twice) 
Noetically revolving round about Thee, О Master, the angels eternally receive 
Thine effulgence transcending understanding, ever chanting and saying: Blessed 
art Thou, О God, throughout the ages! 
Theotokion: The incorporeal archangel said: “O blessed one, the Lord is with 
thee!” For, desiring to restore corrupted nature, He made His abode within thy 
womb, О blessed one who hast given birth to God in the flesh. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Thy venerable Children in the furnace * likened to the cherubim * 
chanted the thrice-holy hymn * Bless ye, praise ye and supremely exalt ye 
the Lord throughout all ages. 
In my conduct I have emulated the rich man’s lack of mercy. Overlooking 
mine impoverished mind, О Christ, send me not into the unquenchable fire, who 
stand before the gates of repentance corrupted by evil. 
From this life send me not, who am unprepared, into the wintry sabbath, the 
idle lack of good deeds, О Compassionate One Who easeth the winter of sin; but 
grant me divine conversion. 
To the martyrs: Trampling down deceptive falsehood by faith, the martyrs 
endured the threefold waves of tortures in every way, blessing, hymning and 
exalting Christ throughout the ages. 
To the martyrs: Extinguishing the burning flame of torments with the dew of 
patience, ye utterly consumed the tinder of ungodliness, afire with the zeal of 
divine love, О holy and right victorious martyrs. 
Theotokion: As higher in honor than the angels, and having been 
magnificently sanctified, О Virgin Theotokos, thou hast given birth to the most 
holy God; wherefore, sanctify my soul. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
As of old Thou didst protect Elisha, Thy favored one, with armies of 
incorporeal beings, О Christ, so now encompass the Church which exalteth Thee 
supremely, throughout the ages. (Twice) 
О divine chief commanders, as ye stand before the dread throne, pray that 
those who with love glorify and exalt Christ throughout all ages may be delivered 
from transgressions. 
Theotokion: О divinely joyous one, with the divine Gabriel we cry “Rejoice!” 
to thee, the Mother and Virgin; since for our sake thou hast given birth in the 
flesh to the Word of God, Whom we exalt supremely throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: О Virgin who received the angel’s salutation * and hast given birth 
to thine own Creator, * save those who magnify thee. 
Having maintained his chastity, Joseph was appointed distributor of grain; but 
I, who commit fornication, am beset by a famine of virtuous deeds. 
Repenting like Peter, О Christ, I offer up tears; I sigh like the publican, and 
like the prodigal son I cry out from the depths of my heart: I have sinned! Forgive 
me! 
To the martyrs: With Christ as your ally, ye cast down the evil of the enemy, О 
most wise ones, and received crowns of victory from on high. 
To the martyrs: Through the Holy Spirit the holy memorial of all the martyrs 
sanctifieth those who hallow it in an Orthodox manner. 
Theotokion: О thou who hast given birth to the Light of dispassion, enlighten 
me who have been darkened by sins, that I may hymn thee, О pure Ever-virgin. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
In that for the sake of Thy prophet David Thou didst cause Thine angel, who 
was cutting down Thy people, to desist, so also, in that Thou art compassionate, 
О Christ, grant peace to all the Churches, easing the temptations which now 
afflict them, in that Thou art greatly merciful. (Twice) 
Seeing the afflictions of Thy people, О Christ Master, as the Physician of souls 
and bodies heal them, through the supplications of Thy ministers, who now stand 
round about Thee, the King of all, and with constant cries glorify Thee as God. 
Theotokion: Honoring now thine exceedingly glorious birthgiving, О Virgin 
Mother, the principalities, archangels, dominions and seraphim, the powers, 
authorities, thrones and cherubim ever reverently glorify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VI: 
Finding me naked, and stripped of virtues, the enemy hath wounded me with 
the arrow of sin; but, do Thou as the Physician of both soul and body, heal the 
wounds of my soul O God, and have mercy on me.  
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
The wounds of my heart, inflicted on me by my many sins, do Thou heal O 
Savior, as Thou art the Physician of both soul and body, for Thou dost always 
grant the forgiveness of sins unto those that ask it of Thee. O Lord grant me tears 
of repentance and remission of debts, and have mercy on me.  
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: At the commemoration of Thy saints, O Lord, all creation 
celebrateth; the heavens rejoice with the angels, and the earth with all mankind 
keepeth festival. By their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Theotokos, thou didst receive the angel’s words, * wast shown to be the 
throne of the cherubim, ** and bore in thine arms the Hope of our souls. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE VI  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VI 
Remember me, О God my Savior, when Thou shalt come in Thy kingdom, 
and save me, in that Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Overlook what I have done in knowledge and in ignorance, О Jesus Who 
lovest mankind, and grant unto me the portion of the saved. 
О Christ Who enlightened the angelic choirs, by their supplications enlighten 
the eyes of my heart 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers who underwent every trial of wounds, ever 
heal the stripes and sores of the believers. 
Glory ..., Let us worship the Holy Trinity, Who is hymned by the armies of the 
angels, and let us cry out: Save Thou our souls! 
Both now ..., О Birthgiver of God, deliver me from everlasting fire and the 
torments which await me, that I may call thee blessed. 
 
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His minis-
ters a flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame 
of fire.  
 
  
