--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING: TONE VI  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance,  
The composition of Joseph, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “For the wretchedness of life ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Who doth not weep for me, who in intemperance have broken the 
commandment of the Most High? I have come to dwell in Hades instead of 
paradise through the sight of the sweet food which brought about death, and 
because of it I have become a stranger to life and the glory of God. Yet accept me 
the penitent, О Lord, for the sake of Thy great mercy, in that Thou art merciful 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Behold my sorrow and pain, and the countless multitude of my transgressions, 
the affliction of my soul and the delusion of my mind. Attend unto the cry of one 
who is accursed and condemned, О Lord, and grant me a contrite spirit and a 
humble heart; and in Thy great mercy give me a wellspring of tears and 
forgiveness for my many transgressions. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
О God, Who desirest that all should be saved: Look down and hearken unto 
my supplication, and reject not my tears as shed in vain. For who having come to 
Thee weeping hath not been saved straightway? Who having cried out fervently 
unto Thee hath not been hearkened to straightway? О Master, be Thou quick to 
save all who entreat Thee, for Thou art invincible in mercy. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy forerunner, in the same tone: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Disdain me not who have strayed from the path of life, О Forerunner of the 
Savior. I lift up mine eyes unto Thee, and cry: Set the feet of my soul upon the 
rock of repentance; show me how to walk the straight way which leadeth to the 
gates of salvation; and reject not the groaning of my sorrowful heart, О thou who 
art the greatest of all who have been born. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples, 
О Baptist and Forerunner of the Savior: Be thou a helper unto me who have 
sunk in the mire of impure thoughts; extend to me the hand which touched the 
head of the Incorrupt One; strengthen me that I may valiantly do the works of 
repentance, which thou didst preach; and grant that I, thy servant, may enter into 
the kingdom, which thou wast the first to proclaim, О blessed one. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
О Baptist of Christ, who by thy birth didst loose thy mother’s barrenness and 
thy father’s tongue, rid thou my childless heart of fruitlessness, and quickly 
remove all the irrationality of my soul, for thou wast the voice of the Word, 
announcing repentance, which do thou grant that I may ever achieve, who in my 
slothfulness have withdrawn from God. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О most holy Virgin, show forth upon me, the wretched one, the depths of thy 
love for mankind, the abyss of thy tender compassion, and the countless 
compassions of thy goodness. Mow down the stubble of sin, granting me chastity, 
and preserve my body and soul undefiled, О thou who hast given birth to the 
Savior. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst 
hearken unto me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VI: 
At Thy fearful Coming, O Christ, * may we not hear the words: * “I know you 
not.” * For though, O Savior, we have put our trust in Thee, * from negligence we 
have not kept Thy commandments; * yet we entreat Thee, ** do Thou spare our 
souls.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
I have no repentance and I have no tears. * Wherefore I entreat Thee, O 
Christ God: * before the end is here * turn me back and grant me compunction, * 
that I may be delivered ** from the torments of Hades.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О martyred passion-bearers, citizens of heaven, who suffered 
on the earth, ye endured many torments. By their supplications and entreaty, О 
Lord, preserve us all. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
No one that fleeth unto thee, O most pure Virgin Theotokos, * departeth 
from thee ashamed; * for those that asketh grace of thee, ** ever receiveth a gift 
for their profitable petition.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE VI 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
Bent low by a multitude of temptations and grievous acts, I bow before thee 
the neck of my soul and body, О pure one, and cry out to thee with fervor: Do 
thou set me aright! 
О all-immaculate maiden, mighty help of the faithful and hope of Christians: 
Free me from the carnal lusts and passions which war against me! 
Glory ..., О most pure one, thou luminous guide of those in darkness, having 
given birth to the noetic Light, illumine my soul and sanctify my mind, dissolving 
the gloom of passions and transgressions. 
Both now ..., With the light of the holy commandments of Him Who became 
incarnate from thee, О Lady Theotokos, dispel the darkness of my soul, which 
hath been cast into darkness by the onslaughts of unseemly thoughts. 
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
In thee have I placed my trust, О pure and most pure one. Let not my hope in 
thee be disappointed. In that thou art the merciful Mother of God and the Lover 
of mankind, deliver me from the snares of the enemy. 
О most pure Mary Mother of God, portal of salvation through which the 
Creator of all alone passed, open now unto me the divine gates of repentance. 
Glory ..., О pure one, be thou a refuge and haven for me who am ever 
tempest-tossed by the threefold waves of the passions on the sea of life, О only 
Ever-virgin. 
Both now ..., О Mary Mother of God, illumine my soul, which hath been 
grievously darkened by many sins, wounded by the darts of the evil one, and fallen 
ill. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
As thou art my strength, refuge, unassailable rampart and advocate before 
God, О most pure one, free me from everlasting flame and Gehenna. 
О all-pure Mary, dispel thou the tumult of the passions of my mind and the 
storm of temptations, in that thou hast given birth to the Source of dispassion, О 
Ever-virgin Mother. 
Glory ..., О pure and all-immaculate one, as thou wast the receptacle of purity 
which accommodated the habitation of God, do away with the defilement and 
impurity of my soul. 
Both now ..., О maiden, I pray thee, who alone art pure, who alone art 
undefiled: By thy prayers cleanse thou my soul, which hath been defiled and 
sullied by lustful passions. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
Defiled in mind and sullied by many falls, О Mother of God, I entreat thee, 
who alone art undefiled: Have pity and save me by thy mediation. 
With thy divine effulgence, О good one, illumine my soul, which hath been 
darkened by pleasures, and guide it to the path of salvation, О thou who alone 
hast given birth to Christ the Savior. 
Glory ..., Loose thou the bonds of my sins by thy mediation and aid, О Virgin, 
and fill my wretched soul with divine tranquility, and deliver it from darkness. 
Both now ..., Having now acquired thee alone as my divine refuge, О good 
one, I cry to thee, falling down with faith: Thou art my help! Be thou also my 
shelter of salvation, О Sovereign Lady of the world, and save me. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
Guilty of sin, wretch that I am, I have been grievously wounded. To thee who 
art merciful, О Mother of God, do I flee, praying: Set at naught my falls into 
transgressions. 
О portal of grace who hast opened unto the faithful the gates of heaven, open 
unto me the radiant door of repentance, and deliver me from the gates of death. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., О Mother of God who hast given birth to the Source of dispassion, 
render me steadfast, who am brought low by the passions and the assaults of the 
adversary; for unto thee have I fled, for thou art the comforter of my wretched 
soul. 
Both now ..., Look down upon me, the lowly one, О Lady, and beyond 
expectation save me; for thou art my hope and protection, the life and light of my 
heart, and my confirmation, О Theotokos. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
О most holy Virgin Mother, thou art truly the strength of the helpless; 
wherefore, we, the lowly, are exalted by thee, and in thee are we borne aloft. Thou 
art the protection of all and their mediatress before God. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
We ever have thee as our cleansing before God, О most immaculate one; 
wherefore, ask thou that all who confess thee to truly be the Theotokos be 
delivered from dread torments to come. 
Raise me up, who am stuck fast in slothfulness, to the doing of godly works, 
О most pure one, strengthening me against the enemy who ever wages cruel war 
against me, and against those who would lead me astray with adverse thoughts. 
Glory ..., Leave me not to perish, О Virgin, neither allow me to fall prey to the 
evil serpent who ever thirsteth for my destruction; but grant me thy rich mercy. 
Both now ..., Fail not in thy supplications before of our God and the Lover of 
mankind, О all-immaculate and pure one, that we may receive complete 
forgiveness, and obtain the good things of heaven prepared for the just, and the 
joy which cannot be taken away. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Show forth my barren heart to be laden with the fruit of good works, О all-
pure one, entreating God by thy birthgiving. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Pray unto God, О Virgin full of the grace of God, that He save our souls and 
deliver us from being accepting of the passions and from the evil temptations of 
the demons. 
Glory ..., I flee to thy protection, О all-immaculate one, and set thee forth as 
the intercessor for my life. Deliver me, О maiden, from dread condemnation, 
from trial and ever lasting fire. 
Both now ..., Make steadfast my soul, which hath been shaken by the evil of 
the foe, О pure Virgin, and rescue me from the fiery torment and the painful lot 
of the goats. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
The turbulence of the passions doth trouble and engulf me in pleasures, О 
most immaculate Virgin who hast given birth to Christ the Helmsman. Extend to 
me thy helping hand, and save me, О thou who alone art the salvation of those 
who with faith call thee blessed. 
О bridal-chamber and throne of Him Who reigneth, mountain of God, chosen 
city, garden of paradise, most radiant cloud of the Sun: illumine my soul, driving 
away the cloud of my many sins, О thou who art full of the grace of God. 
Glory ..., О pure and divine chosen Virgin, portal of the Light: open thou the 
gates of my soul, locking the door of sin, that the hand of the deceiver not seize 
me, and drag me cruelly into the dread torment of perdition. 
Both now ..., Arise, О my soul, and be thou watchful in prayer and in care for 
that which is most good, driving away the sleep of despondency, ever having the 
pure and most compassionate Mother of God as thy vigilant ally. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., and 
the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE VI 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VI: 
I think upon the dread day, and I weep over my wicked deeds. How shall I 
answer the immortal King? With what boldness shall I, the prodigal, lift mine eyes 
to the Judge? О compassionate Father, only-begotten Son and Holy Spirit: Have 
mercy on me! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
In the vale of weeping, in the place which Thou hast appointed, rebuke me 
not, О Merciful One, when Thou shalt come to render just judgment, neither 
shame me before the angels; but take pity on me, О God, and have mercy on me. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Open unto us the doors of repentance, О blessed Virgin Theotokos. Let not 
those who trust in thee perish, but may we be delivered by thee from misfortunes, 
for thou art the salvation of the race of mankind. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI: 
О my soul, how long shalt thou labor for sin in despondency; how long shalt 
thou, sick, fail to go to the Physician? Arise then from the evils thou hast 
committed, and cry unto the Lord, saying: О Savior, Hope of the hopeless and 
Life of the despairing, raise me up, and save me? 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
Grant unto me the vigilance of the wise virgins, О Lord, and enlighten the 
lamp of my soul with the oil of Thy compassions, that I may chant unto Thee the 
angelic hymn: Alleluia! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Having endured the struggle of martyrdom, the saints receive 
from Thee the honors of victory; they set at naught the intentions of the 
iniquitous, and have received crowns of incorruption. For their sake be Thou 
entreated, О God, and grant us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou good Virgin Theotokos, * the hope of the world, * we beg thine 
intercession which alone is mighty: * have compassionate mercy upon us, * a 
people bereft of an intercessor; * beseech the merciful God, that our souls be 
delivered from every threat, ** O thou who alone art blessed!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “The Hope ...”: 
As thou didst point out the ways of life unto the people, О John, crying out: 
“Set your hearts aright for the Lord!”, By thy prayers save my greatly sinful soul, 
bring my hardened mind to compunction, and deliver me from the torment to 
come, О Forerunner of the Savior. 
The tempest of the passions and the cruel threefold waves of transgressions 
have drowned me in the depths of despair, О Word; but stretch forth to me Thy 
mighty right hand, and save me, as Thou didst Peter, from the depths of my cruel 
iniquities, through the supplications of Thy Forerunner. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The Son and Word of God, Who was begotten of the Father before the ages 
without a mother, thou didst bear in times past, incarnate from thy pure blood 
without the aid of a man, О Birthgiver of God. Him do thou entreat, that we be 
granted remission of sins before the end. 
ODE I 
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ and His holy martyrs, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My 
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him * 
for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
О Jesus my Redeemer, as Thou didst deliver from many transgressions the 
harlot who once made goodly repentance, I beseech Thee: Deliver me also from 
my countless evils, in that Thou art merciful. 
Sailing this cruel sea of life in vain thoughts, О Jesus, I have fallen into many 
floods. Delivering me from them, save me. 
To the martyrs: Let us joyously honor the valiant spiritual athletes, the 
destroyers of the alien one, those who suffered patiently and have received from 
God crowns of victory. 
To the martyrs: Holding forth, О wise ones, with the boldness of the Word of 
God ye vanquished the orators; and having endured every kind of wound, ye have 
been greatly glorified. 
Theotokion: Thou hast been shown to be the gate of Life, О pure one who by 
thy birthgiving shut the gates of death. Thou hast been revealed to be the chosen 
ground whereby our human substance hath been lifted from earth up to heaven. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Another canon, of the holy prophet and forerunner, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: The lecherous Pharaoh was drowned with all his warriors, * and 
Israel, crossing through the midst of the sea, * cried aloud exclaiming: * 
Let us chant unto the Lord God, * for He hath been glorified! 
The divine angel announced thy birth beforehand to thy father, О angel of 
God. With him be thou mindful of us, that on the day of judgment we may find 
mercy, О holy Forerunner. 
As the beauteous scion of the desert, О Forerunner of Christ, uproot the 
slothfulness which continually springs up within me, and cause me to produce the 
fruits of repentance. 
A childless womb hath most gloriously giveth birth to thee as fruit, showing 
hearts which before were unfruitful to be right fertile. But I cry out to thee with 
faith: О Baptist, uproot my fruitless thoughts! 
Theotokion: Unceasingly doth the wicked enemy lay traps for me with 
cunning. О all-immaculate one, rescue me from his pursuit, and instruct me how 
to do the divine will of the Master, О Theotokos. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my 
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord. 
When I must needs stand before Thee and be judged, О only easily reconciled 
Lord, look upon me with the eye of Thy mercy. 
Accept me who sigh like the publican from the depths of my soul, and grant 
me repentance, О Savior, which delivereth me from every sin. 
To the martyrs: By the flow of your most holy blood, О saints, the abominable 
blood which once was offered to the demons in pagan temples ceased. 
To the martyrs: Strengthened by the most holy Spirit, О holy ones, ye 
demolished the pernicious temples, making all steadfast in the Faith. 
Theotokion: О most holy one, thou didst conceive Him Who upholdeth the 
whole world; wherefore, I pray thee: Deliver me from every torment which 
holdeth me. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Having established my thoughts upon the firm rock of Thy Faith, * 
make steadfast my soul, О Lord; * for I have Thee as my refuge * and 
confirmation, * О good One. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Grant that I, who have strayed from, the path, may now return; and extend thy 
hand to me who ever navigates the abyss of evils, О blessed Forerunner. 
I live my life in slothfulness, and the time when I shall be cut down draweth 
nigh. By thy prayers grant that I may arise, О ever-glorious Forerunner, lest I be 
cast into the inextinguishable fire as barren. 
The dread day is at hand, and I am laden with grievous burdens. Lift them 
from me, О Baptist of the Lord, by thy pure supplications. 
Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed to be the throne of God, on which 
Christ sat in the flesh and raised up from the primal fall those who hymn thee 
with joyful voices. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. * 
How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * and 
he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord. 
Grant me streams of tears which dry up the wellsprings of my passions, wash 
away the mire of every sin, and quench the everlasting and inextinguishable flame 
of the fire of Gehenna, О Compassionate and greatly Merciful One. 
The sores of my soul continually itch with love of pleasures, and I remain 
unhealed, not desiring to come to my senses. What shall become of me? What 
shall I do? О compassionate Christ, heal and save me! 
To the martyrs: О ever-blessed martyrs, who with divine navigation sailed the 
roiling deep, the waters of perdition, ye reached the safe and stormless haven of 
the kingdom of heaven. 
To the martyrs: As luminaries of piety and lamps of truth, with the light of 
your struggles ye destroyed the greatly painful darkness of ungodliness, and with 
rays of miracles ye dispel the gloom of suffering. 
Theotokion: Of old, the prophet foresaw thee as a seven-branched lampstand 
bearing the Fire of the knowledge of God, О maiden, enlightening those who 
languish in the darkness of ignorance. Wherefore, I cry out to thee, О all-
immaculate one: Enlighten me, I pray! 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the report of Thee * and was afraid; * I have 
seen Thy works and was amazed. * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
With the effective medicine of thy prayers, О Forerunner, heal my heart, 
which hath been wounded by highway robbers, I pray thee. 
Cast down the sin which yet liveth within my soul, О Forerunner, and grant 
that I may now arise, who fall headlong into pleasures. 
Thou hast been shown to be a harbor for us who are tempest-tossed on the 
deep of the storm of life, and bring us all into tranquility, О thou who art most 
rich. 
Theotokion: She who gave birth to Thee entreateth Thee with the Forerunner, 
saying: “Condemn me not, О Lord, according to my deeds, but show Thyself to 
be merciful to me, О all-Compassionate One!” 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O 
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach me, 
O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
О Christ, I am Thy slothful servant, who have hidden Thy talant and am 
confounded by the evil deeds of my passions; wherefore, send me not into the 
fire. 
Though I became Thy child through grace, О compassionate Christ, yet I have 
enslaved myself to the enemy and have departed from Thee, living prodigally; 
wherefore, turn me back and save me. 
To the martyrs: The martyrs stood before the tribunal, arrayed in the armor of 
faith; wherefore, the cruel apostate was unable to wound them with arrows of 
falsehood. 
To the martyrs: Wounded, the bodies of the martyrs slew all the wiles of the 
enemy; and in joy they passed over to the life which waxeth not old, having 
received crowns of victory. 
Theotokion: О pure guide of all, thou impassable gate, open unto me the gates 
of true repentance, I pray, and show me the path of penitence. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: I seek Thee early in the morning, * Who for our sake didst 
mercifully empty Thyself without undergoing change, * and without 
passion didst submit to Thy Passion. * O Word of God, grant unto me the 
fallen one, Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thou wast the temple of the divine Trinity, О Forerunner; and, assembled in 
this thy holy temple, with fervent prayers we beseech thee: Deliver us from 
temptations and tribulations, О all-praised one. 
I, who have estranged my mind from every virtue, now entreat thee, О blessed 
one who walked a strange path in this life: Join me to the Lord of all, making me 
better by thine excellent gifts. 
О prophet who immersed the Abyss of tender compassion in the streams of 
the Jordan, By thy prayers dry up the torrents of my passions now, giving me 
springs of tears. 
Theotokion: Supremely adorned with divine rays, О Virgin, thou hast given 
birth unto Him Who is comely in beauty. Wherefore, ever entreat Him, that He 
save from corruption those who glorify thee with faith and love. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate 
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised up 
my life from corruption. 
Let me not be seen as a joy to the demons on the dread day, О Christ Jesus, 
lest I then hear the voice sentencing me to the fire of Gehenna. 
The enemy of the righteous hath drowned me in the depths of transgressions, 
but I flee to the abyss of Thy compassions, О Jesus, crying aloud: Guide me now 
to the harbor of life! 
To the martyrs: Having cultivated the furrows of your souls with the plough 
of many pangs, О most wise ones, with the divine seed of faith ye manifestly 
produced the abundantly fruitful grain of martyrdom. 
To the martyrs: With your wounds ye wounded him who wounded us, О 
pious warriors; wherefore, having passed over to life, ye now heal the sufferings of 
all. 
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be the temple of God, О all-immaculate 
one; and making His abode within thee in sanctity, He deified human nature and 
made the faithful into temples for Himself. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have encompassed me; * and its stormy 
waves I can endure no more, * wherefore like Jonah I cry out to Thee, O 
Master: * Lead me up from corruption. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Thou didst spring forth as an offshoot of a root, О prophet, showing hearts 
barren of all goodly knowledge to be right fruitful for the praise of God. 
Crush the evil one speedily beneath our feet, and by thine intercessions direct 
our noetic footsteps toward the path of peace, О Forerunner. 
Surround thy flock with righteousness, О prophet, delivering us from every 
attack of the demons and from everlasting torment. 
Theotokion: We now offer unto thee hymnody of thanksgiving, О Virgin; for 
saved from the ancient curse by thee, О pure one, we produce every blessing like 
fruit. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil 
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but 
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 
I who have sinned beyond measure look upon Thine immeasurable mercy. I 
know Thy tender compassion; I know Thy long-suffering and forbearance. Grant 
me fruits of repentance, О compassionate Christ, and save me. 
Heal the incurable sufferings of my heart, О Compassionate One, grant the 
severance of my debts, and ease my heavy burden, that in compunction I may 
ever glorify Thee, the God of our fathers. 
To the martyrs: Bound, beheaded, consumed by material fire, cast to the lions 
as food, stretched on the wheel, the divine and sacred spiritual athletes did not 
deny Thee, our living God. 
To the martyrs: Ye were parted from your bodies, yet were shown to be un-
separated from God, О martyrs, because of your divine union with Him Who 
united Himself to us incorruptibly. Him do ye ever beseech, that we be delivered 
from all want. 
Theotokion: Without seed thou didst put forth Him Whom the Father began 
incorruptibly, and thou didst remain a virgin even after giving birth, as thou wast 
before birthgiving. Wherefore, thou art unceasingly blessed and glorified, О most 
pure one, as the Mother of God. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast into 
the midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * ‘O Lord God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou.’ 

--- PAGE 15 ---
As the voice of the Word, О Baptist, accept now our cries, and deliver thy 
people from sufferings and misfortunes, from many evil circumstances and 
everlasting torment. 
With thy hand thou didst point to the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins 
of the world, О prophet. Him do thou ever beseech, that He take away my 
grievous offenses and difficult times, and grant me life. 
О my soul, hasten thou and, abandoning the darkness of irrational deeds, cry 
out: Have pity on me, О Jesus, through the supplications of the Baptist, and 
rescue me from the mire of my deeds! 
Theotokion: Unto Him, before Whom the ranks of heaven stand with 
trembling, and Who in His goodness united Himself unto mankind, didst thou 
give birth, О pure one. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He have pity on thy 
servants. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom tremble 
the cherubim and seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * praise, 
bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 
Having sinned more than David, I gaze upon the great mercy of Thy 
compassions, О Christ, and with him cry aloud: О only Merciful One, speedily 
have mercy upon me! 
I pray that mine end may be good, and that I may bring an end to my wicked 
deeds. Yet my intention is not sincere, for my heart is hardened. Have pity on me, 
О Word of God. 
To the martyrs: О passion-bearers, ye willingly offered yourselves as chosen 
and unblemished sacrifices unto the only-begotten Word Who sacrificed Himself 
for our sake, abolishing all the sacrifices of the demons. 
To the martyrs: The severing of your tendons, the uprooting of your teeth, the 
cutting off of your hands, the fracture of your members, and every other torture 
did ye valiantly endure, О martyrs, hymning Christ, the only Judge of the contest. 
Theotokion: For us thou hast given birth to the Ancient of days as a little 
babe, Who showeth us new paths on earth, renewing our nature which hath 
waxed old, О unwedded and blessed one. 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the 
blessed Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * 
Standing together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * 
and sang a song fitting for almighty God: * ‘O ye works of the Lord, praise 
ye the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.’ 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou didst behold the Holy Spirit descending in the form of a dove upon the 
Word as He was baptized, О blessed one, and wast deemed worthy to hear the 
voice of the Father, saying: “This is my Son, Who is co-enthroned with Me, to 
Whom all creation doth sing: Hymn the Lord, О ye works, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages!” 
Having consumed the flammable passions of my mind with the fire of thy 
prayers, О prophet, light again the lamp of my heart, which hath gone out, that, 
seeing clearly, I may chant unto the Creator of the light of the commandments: 
Hymn the Lord, ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
I am the wretched servant who hid the talant which I received from Thee to 
invest. What shall I do when Thou comest to render judgment, trying the deeds of 
each man? But have pity on me through the supplications of Thy Forerunner, and 
send me not into the fire who cry: Hymn the Lord, О ye works, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Theotokion: Maintain my mind in humility, О maiden full of the grace of 
God, who by thy birthgiving hast crushed the uprising of the demons. Raise me 
up from the dung-hill of the passions, and with thy grace fill me, who hunger and 
chant: Hymn the Lord, О ye works, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth of 
God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship and 
magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
О Jesus Who lovest mankind, Thou alone knowest our infirmity, for in Thy 
tender compassion Thou didst clothe Thyself therein, desiring to cleanse it. 
Wherefore, cleanse my wicked defilements and the sores of mine evils, and save 
me. 
Like the harlot I offer Thee tears, О Lover of mankind; like the publican I cry 
out, groaning, unto Thee: Cleanse and save me! And like the Canaanite woman I 
exclaim: Have mercy on me, as Thou didst the penitent Peter, and grant me 
forgiveness! 
To the martyrs: Wrestling in the flesh with the incorporeal prince of this 
world, by your struggles of suffering ye cast him down, and have worthily received 
crowns of victory. Wherefore, pray ye earnestly for all who praise you with faith, 
О holy ones. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
To the martyrs: With the holy blood of Thy saints Thou didst sanctify the 
earth, О Lord, uniting their spirits to the spirits of the holy hosts, О most Holy 
One; and by them Thou dost ever sanctify those who hallow Thee with true faith. 
Theotokion: We offer unto thee the cry of the archangel, О all-pure and 
blessed one: Rejoice, thou who contained the uncontainable God! Rejoice, 
annulment of the curse and induction of blessing! Rejoice, thou who alone 
openest the gate of paradise! 
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: Come, ye faithful, let us raise our minds on high * and enjoy the 
Master’s hospitality * and the table of immortal life in the upper room; * 
and let us hear the exalted teaching of the Word * Whom We magnify. 
Cure thou my mind, which hath been grievously infected by the love of life’s 
pleasures, still the tempest which vexeth me greatly, and show me the straight 
ways of repentance, О Forerunner of the Lord. 
Thou wast seen standing between the Old and the New Covenants, О 
prophet, causing the former to cease and revealing the latter as light. Quickly 
guide us to walk therein with a godly conscience, that we may be delivered from 
everlasting darkness. 
The dread judgment will be a day full of wrath, a day of darkness for those 
whose works are dark, О Baptist and Forerunner of Christ. By thy prayers deliver 
us from all condemnation then, for we honor thee. 
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be holier than the cherubim, О Virgin, for 
thou hast given birth to the supremely holy God. Sanctify us all, who day and 
night hallow thee with holy voices and faith. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VI: 
Finding me naked, and stripped of virtues, * the enemy hath wounded me with 
the arrow of sin; * but, do Thou as the Physician of both soul and body, * heal the 
wounds of my soul O God, ** and have mercy upon me.  
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
The wounds of my heart, * inflicted on me by my many sins, * do Thou heal 
O Savior, * as Thou art the Physician of both soul and body, * for Thou dost 
always grant the forgiveness of sins * unto those that ask it of Thee. * O Lord 
grant me tears of repentance and remission of debts, ** and have mercy upon me.  
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: О Lord, if we did not have Thy saints as advocates * and in 
Thy goodness having mercy upon us, * how would we dare to hymn Thee, Whom 
the angels glorify without ceasing. ** О Thou Who knowest the hearts of men, 
spare our souls! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou wast deemed worthy of great gifts, * O pure Virgin Mother of God, * 
for thou didst give birth in the flesh * to One of the Holy Trinity, * Christ, the 
Giver of life, ** unto the salvation of our souls.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE VI 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VI 
Remember me, О God my Savior, when Thou shalt come in Thy kingdom, 
and save me, in that Thou alone lovest mankind. 
О Christ Who accepted the lamentation of Peter, accept also my repentance; 
and grant me forgiveness of mine offenses. 
О Baptist and Forerunner of the Lord, who preached repentance to mankind, 
pray that I may repent with all my soul.  
Martyricon: Having endured threefold waves of sufferings, О passion-
bearers, ye now heal the infirmities of all; wherefore, ye are called blessed. 
Glory ..., О Thou Who by the prophets art glorified in the simple and 
uncommingled Trinity, save me by the supplications of the Forerunner! 
Both now ..., О mighty intercession for those who find themselves amid 
tribulations, intercede for me, who partake of the pleasures of life, and save me, I 
pray thee. 
 
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I make supplication unto Thee.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
  
