--- PAGE 1 ---
 TUESDAY EVENING: TONE VI 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
When Thou wast crucified, О long-suffering Lord, Thou didst shake the 
whole earth, making steadfast the hearts of the faithful; wherefore, we hymn Thee 
and with love worship Thine unapproachable power. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Spat upon and smitten on the cheek, О Savior, Thou didst smite the evil of the 
venomous foe, taking away the fall which Adam endured, who was abducted 
because of his transgression. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
The sun was darkened, the whole earth quaked, and the stones split asunder, 
when they beheld Thee suspended unjustly upon the Tree, setting aside Thine 
own will, О Savior. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VI, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Standing once with the virginal disciple at the foot of the Cross during the 
crucifixion , the Virgin cried, weeping: “Woe is me! How is it that Thou sufferest, 
О Christ, Thou dispassion of all?” 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
“Mindful of Thy seedless conception and most pure birthgiving, I marvel 
greatly. How hast Thou been thus well-pleased to die like a malefactor, О 
Savior?”, the most pure one cried out. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
“I am crucified, nailed to the Tree like a man, and am placed in a tomb as one 
dead, О pure Virgin Mother. But as God I will rise again in glory on the third 
day!” 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Thy pure Virgin Mother, * beholding the most iniquitous 
people * who unjustly nailed Thee to the Tree, ** was wounded within, as Symeon 
foretold.  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VI 
 Thy Cross is life and help for Thy people, О Lord; and trusting therein, we 
hymn Thee, our God Who wast crucified in the flesh. Have mercy on us! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Thy Cross, О Lord, hath opened paradise to the race of mankind; and 
delivered from corruption, we hymn Thee, our God Who wast crucified in the 
flesh. Have mercy on us! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: They who suffered for Thy sake, О Christ, endured many 
torments and have received perfect crowns in the heavens. May they pray on 
behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding our Life suspended upon the Tree, * the 
all-immaculate Theotokos cried aloud, * maternally lamenting: ** O my Son and 
my God, save those who with love hymn Thee!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
TUESDAY NIGHT 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
In every way I lament my vile life and the multitude of mine abominable sins. 
How shall I confess to thee, О pure one? I am at a loss and filled with fear. Yet 
help me, О Lady. 
How shall I begin to speak of my wicked and grievous falls, plagued as I am 
by the passions? Woe is me! What shall I do? Yet before the end take pity on me, 
О Lady. 
Glory ..., I ever contemplate the hour of death and the dread tribunal, О most 
pure one, yet am I grievously led astray by my most wicked habits. But do thou 
help me. 
Both now .., The corrupter of the good, seeing me now stripped naked of 
godly virtues, fallen far away from God and become a stranger to Him, striveth to 
devour me. But do thou prevent him, О Lady. 
ODE III 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
I have vilely besmirched my soul with mine evil and abominable deeds, 
plagued as I am by the passions, О Lady Theotokos. Where then shall I go, who 
am wholly stuck fast in despondency? 
Though created in the image of God, I have sullied my prodigal self by mine 
haughty will, О pure one, and through my likeness, in works, in word and 
thought, I have committed unseemly deeds. 
Glory ..., There is no other man who hath committed such unseemly acts, nor 
any other born into the world as darkened in mind as I, О good one; for I have 
defiled my divine baptism. 
Both now ..., I have reached the end of mine evils, О most holy Virgin. 
Quickly help me, for heaven and earth cry out bitterly because of my vile and 
wicked deeds. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
The ranks of angels and the armies of the hosts of heaven are in awe of the 
might of thy Son, О pure one. But I am in despair, stuck fast in my lack of fear. 
All the earth hath been amazed and astonished, beholding me committing evil, 
wicked and vile acts, and it marvelleth at the great loving-kindness of thy Son. 
Glory ...,I have wickedly defiled the temple of my body, and the temple of the 
Lord which we enter with trembling; for although I am a prodigal, I enter it 
without shame. Woe is me! 
Both now ..., О Lady, show me not, О show me not to have wandered away 
from the tabernacle of thy Son, though I am in every way unworthy, but wash me. 
clean of the defilement of my transgressions. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
With thy divine effulgence, О good one, cure my soul of the passions which 
the corrupter hath sown therein, and deliver me from his bitter captivity, for he 
laughs me to scorn, beholding my helpless state. 
Adam broke the only commandment of thy Son, О Virgin, and was driven 
into exile. How shall I lament the abyss of my transgressions, for I am a criminal 
and have fallen away from Him? 
Glory ..., Shown of old to be a murderer of his brother, Cain was cursed by 
God. What shall I do, who am most arrogant? I have now brought death upon my 
soul, and am not ashamed. 
Both now ..., I have wholly emulated the cruel Esau in gluttony and eating to 
satiety, and have defiled my soul by drunkenness and my life with intemperance. 
Who will not weep for me, who am plagued by the passions? Woe is me! 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
My life is prodigal, my soul defiled, my way of living wholly accursed. I have 
grievously dishonored my whole body with evils. Wherefore, hasten thou to help 
me, О Virgin. 
Mine end lieth before me, and I cannot bear it, О good one. My conscience 
denounces me, for all my wicked deeds and my prodigal life confront me, and I 
fear the judgment of thy Son, О pure one. 
Glory ..., The burning of my flesh, the dreadful river of fire which cannot be 
quenched, and the insatiable worm await me; but dispel them By thy prayers, О 
most pure one. 
Both now ..., I am held fast now by trembling, О good one, and I fear the 
pursuit of the evil one; for before the end the corrupter desires to slay me, holding 
me wholly captive, stripped naked of the virtues. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
Thou art the hope, bulwark and refuge of thy people, О Virgin, from whom 
the Savior of all was born without pain, and thou hast saved those who set their 
hope on thee; for thou didst weep for thy Son at the foot of the Cross. Him do 
thou now beseech, that He deliver from corruption all who hymn thee. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Seven times seven hath the evil one fanned a flame for me with the passions, 
ever striving to slay my heart with thoughts of fornication; wherefore, with the 
streams of my tears extinguish it, О Mother of God, and save me. 
Despise me not who am dishonored with the mire of my transgressions, О 
good Lady, for, seeing me in despair, the most evil enemy mocketh me; but do 
thou thyself raise me up with thy mighty hand. 
Glory ..., Awesome is the tribunal, О my numb soul which is art rife with 
passions, and endless and terrible are the torments; yet fall down now before the 
Mother of thy Judge and God, and be not downcast. 
Both now ..., A slave of the passions, I have been mired in a multitude of 
boundless evils and have defiled my soul, body and mind; wherefore, О most pure 
one, with the light of thy radiance quickly lead me to the sweetness of dispassion. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Virgin Mother, who hast given birth to God Who is One of the Trinity and 
didst bear Him in thine arms, quench thou the fiery furnace of the passions, and 
bathe my soul in streams of tears. 
I fear the arrival of death, О most pure one, and am now wholly afraid of the 
judgment thereof, for I have committed evils and am in nowise ashamed. In thy 
prayers take pity on me before the end, О Virgin. 
Glory ..., О Lady, grant me unceasing groans and give me showers of tears to 
wash away my many transgressions and cleanse mine incurable sores, that I may 
inherit everlasting life. 
Both now ..., I confess to thee the multitude of mine evils, О Lady, for no one 
else in the world hath so angered thy God, Son and Lord; wherefore, quickly 
move Him to mercy toward me, О Virgin, 
ODE IX 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Knowing the might of thy great supplication, О most pure one, lo! I approach 
thee with great fear and love; for thy maternal pleas to thy Son are truly able to 
accomplish much, for through His loving-kindness is He inclined to mercy. 
Take the choirs of the archangels and the multitude of the heavenly armies of 
my Creator, the assemblies of apostles and prophets, the martyrs, the venerable 
and the hieromartyrs, О pure one, and pray for us to God. 
Glory ..., Let me obtain thine aid now and at that hour when my spirit shall 
depart, О pure one, and, rescuing me quickly, deliver me from the tyranny of the 
demons, and leave me not in their clutches, О good and most immaculate one. 
Both now ..., I await the compassionate Judge, thy Son Who is the Lover of 
mankind, О pure one. Disdain me not, but render Him well-disposed towards me, 
that at His most pure tribunal He may set me on His right hand, О all-immaculate 
one, for I have set my hope on thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE VI 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VI: 
Thy Cross, О Lord, hath been sanctified; for thereby are healings wrought for 
those who are made sick by sins. Wherefore, we fall down before Thee, crying 
aloud: Have mercy upon us! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet, 
for He is holy. 
No sooner was the tree of Thy Cross planted in the ground, О Christ our 
Lord, than the foundations of death were shaken; and Thou Who hast laid low 
Hades with love dismissed its trembling minions, and hast shown us Thy 
salvation, О Holy One; wherefore we glorify Thee, О Son of God. Have mercy 
upon us! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Thou art the hope, help and haven of thy people, О Virgin, 
for from thee the salvation of the world was truly born. As thou didst weep at the 
Cross of thy Son and God, thou savest those who place their trust in thee. Him 
do thou now beseech, that He deliver from corruption all who hymn thee. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VI: 
Today the words of the prophets are fulfilled; for, lo! we worship at the place 
where Thy feet stood, О Lord; and tasting of the Tree of salvation, we have 
received freedom from sinful passions by the prayers of the Theotokos, О Thou 
Lover of mankind. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
О Lord, the Jews condemned to death Thee, the Life of all; they who crossed 
the Red Sea by the staff of Moses nailed Thee to the Cross; they who sucked 
honey from the rock offered Thee gall. Yet Thou didst endure, that Thou might- 
est free us from slavery to the enemy. О Christ our God, glory to Thee! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: While the choirs of the incorporeal ones stood by, holding 
trophies of victory, and tyrants and kings were amazed, the most wise ones 
showed forth the firm opposition and the wounds of torture of spiritual athletes’ 
in their martyrdom at the tribunal, casting down the apostate by their confession 
of Christ. О Lord Who strengthened them, glory be to Thee! 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Standing before the Cross, the Mother unwedded cried out 
unto Him to Whom she had given birth without seed: “A sword hath pierced my 
heart, О my Son, for I cannot bear to see hanging upon the Tree, Thee before 
Whom all things tremble, as Thou art our Creator and God. О long-suffering 
Lord, glory be to Thee!” 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
When creation beheld Thee nailed of Thine own will to the Cross for our sake, 
О Christ, it quaked with fear; the sun wholly darkened its light; the stones split 
asunder; and the divine veil of the temple was rent in twain in rebuke of the cruel 
and iniquitous Jews. 
In Eden the tree brought corruption upon the first of our race, but the tree of 
the Cross blossomed forth life at the place of the skull; for the malice of the 
enemy was trampled underfoot. And Adam received mercy when Christ was 
nailed to the Cross, crying aloud: “I have found paradise, О blessed Tree!” 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: О Christ, the Ever-virgin maiden who gave birth to Thee, 
beholding Thee lifted up upon the Cross for our sake, was wounded in heart and 
soul by the sword of grief, and wept, lamenting maternally. By her supplications, 
have mercy on us. 
ODE I 
Canon of the precious and life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is 
“Nailed to the Tree, Thou savest me, О Savior,” the composition of 
Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
Extending Thy hands upon the Cross, О Master, Thou didst embrace rejected 
mankind and lead it to Thy Father, in that Thou art His beloved and 
consubstantial Son. 
Thou wast raised up upon the Cross like a lamb, О Word, seeking Thy lost 
sheep; and having found it, Thou didst number it among those who had not 
strayed. О Jesus, glory to Thy might! 

--- PAGE 9 ---
To the martyrs: О right glorious passion-bearing martyrs, desiring the life of 
heaven ye died on earth, enduring many tortures and divers perils, О right blessed 
ones. 
To the martyrs: Standing up for Christ, Who is more just than all, at the unjust 
tribunals, О spiritual athletes, in God ye endured every unjust trial, which justified 
you. 
Theotokion: “O Master, enduring suffering upon the Cross, Thou dost 
mediate dispassion for all those descended from Adam; and beholding Thee, the 
earth quaked,” thou didst cry aloud, О Lady, lamenting maternally. 
Another canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VI 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
The Lord, Who stretched out the sky and founded the earth, having issued 
forth in the flesh from thee, О all-holy Virgin, showed us an earthly heaven. 
О pure one, who didst conceive God Who became a man for our sake, entreat 
Him, that on the day of judgment He have pity on us who have sinned greatly 
against Him. 
The Sun Who shone forth with most brilliant rays from thy holy womb, О 
Lady, illumineth the whole earth; wherefore, enlightened, we honor thee, the 
Mother of God. 
With the light of the holy commandments of Him Who became incarnate 
from thee, О Lady Theotokos, dispel the darkness of my soul and the gloom of 
unseemly thoughts. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
The Cross was planted in the earth, delusion fell, and creation quaked; and 
hearts shaken by the assaults of the enemy were made steadfast by faith. 
Possessed by the devil, unrighteous men condemned to death Thee, the only 
Righteous One, Who dost justify mortals rescuing them from the unrighteous 
hand of the deceiver. 
To the martyrs: The deceiver, bringing all his malice to bear, contended against 
the saints; but he was vanquished, seeing the warriors of divine radiance refusing 
to submit. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
To the martyrs: The comeliness of the bodies of the passion-bearers of Christ 
was altered by wicked wounds, yet the splendor of their effulgence shone forth all 
the more through the activity of the Holy Spirit. 
Theotokion: “O my Son, I understood that I was to give birth to Thee Who 
art comely in beauty more than all men. How now art Thou crucified, О Christ, 
bereft of all beauty?”, the Virgin said, weeping. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Holding in thine hands Christ Who upholdeth all things, О pure Birthgiver of 
God, from the hands of the wicked devil and all harm deliver us who hymn thee. 
By thy prayers deliver us from demonic turmoil, from unjust men, from all 
temptations and corrupting infirmities, О all-immaculate Virgin Lady. 
Behold, all generations call thee blessed, О maiden who in time supra-naturally 
gave birth in the flesh to the timeless Word, yet remained a virgin. 
О Virgin who hast given birth to God, the Lover of mankind, at the hour of 
His dread coming deliver from all condemnation me, thine unprofitable servant. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Beholding Thee, the never-setting Sun, crucified upon the Tree, the sun grew 
dark with fear, and all creation, hymning Thee, was released from dark deception. 
The violators of the law bound thy hands, О Savior, and all who were bound 
with unbreakable bonds were released; the enemy was bound, and falsehood was 
put to shame. 
To the martyrs: With the outpouring of your blood, О martyrs, ye drowned 
the tyrannical Pharaoh who wickedly boasted beyond measure, and ye have passed 
over, rejoicing, to the good land. 
To the martyrs: Soaring over the snares of the enemy on the wings of the 
Spirit, О spiritual athletes, rejoicing, ye hastened to where are the primal goodness, 
life and never-waning light. 
Theotokion: When thou didst behold Him crucified and pierced in His most 
pure side with the spear for our sake, О Lady, thou wast wounded with the sword 
of the sufferings of Him Who became incarnate from thee. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Let us all hymn the holy Virgin, the temple of God, radiantly blessing her, 
deified because of her, and delivered from evils. 
We bless the Virgin as the door leading to divine entry, the divine paradise, the 
noetic place of sanctification, and the beauty of Jacob. 
Christ hath shown thee to be a right calm harbor for those who in purity of 
mind invoke thee, the true Theotokos, with faith and love, О all-immaculate Lady. 
О most pure Mary, thou wast the all-pure and spacious receptacle of the 
indwelling of God, and hast washed the defilement and mire from my soul. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
О Christ Who dost clothe the sky in clouds, Thou wast willingly nailed, naked, 
to the Cross, covering the nakedness of mine evil and enlightening my form, 
adorning it with the robe of incorruption, О Master. 
As the true sweetness of our souls, Christ, the true Vine, was crucified on the 
Cross, exuding the wine which doth abolish all the drunkenness of the delusion of 
the adversary. 
To the martyrs: Replete with sacred wounds, adorned with crowns, and 
standing before God Who suffered in the flesh, О spiritual athletes of Christ, ye 
ask remission for our transgressions. 
To the martyrs: Looking toward the glory, life and true joy of heaven, О 
passion-bearers, ye endured every threefold wave of torment, strengthened by the 
suffering of the Master. 
Theotokion: “O Christ, I who in my womb contained Thee, Whom naught 
can contain, gave birth unto Thee without pain; but now I experience pain, seeing 
Thee crucified, О Christ!”, said the most pure Virgin, weeping. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
The Lord, Who by His word created all things and Who alone feedeth them in 
His wise providence: As He desireth, in His compassion He took form from thee, 
О most pure one, and ineffably became flesh. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Behold, О Virgin, the God, Master and Lord of all was conceived in thy 
womb, as the prophets said; and thou hast ineffably given birth to Him, remaining 
an incorrupt virgin after giving birth, О pure one. 
О Mary, Sovereign Lady of all, in that thou art merciful deliver me from 
dreadful captivity, I pray, and rend asunder the record of my sin with the spear of 
Him Who became incarnate from thee. 
By thy mediation and intercession loose the bonds of my sin, О Virgin, for 
thou art the hope of the desperate, who hasten to thy divine protection. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
Thou wast crowned with thorns, О Long-suffering One, cutting down the 
thorns of the passions; and when Thy side was pierced by the spear, Thou didst 
slay the most wily serpent, who made us mortal. 
Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross, laying low the power of the enemy; and 
didst accept buffeting, freeing me from bitter slavery. I worship Thy long-
suffering, О Compassionate One! 
To the martyrs: Protected by the Cross, the spiritual athletes toppled the evil 
walls of delusion and, adorned with crowns of victory, passed over to make their 
abode in the heavenly city. Wherefore, they are called blessed. 
To the martyrs: Most gloriously scaling the heights of torments, О saints, ye 
brought low the wicked uprisings of the enemy on earth, and received crowns 
from on high. 
Theotokion: “O Effulgence of the Father, how hast Thou been lifted up upon 
the Cross, illumining all things and laying low the author of darkness?”, the most 
pure Lady exclaimed, weeping maternally. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Christ, Who is fire, did not consume thy womb when He issued forth from 
thee in the flesh. Him do thou beseech, О pure one, that those who hymn thee 
with faith may be delivered from fire and every torment. 
О all-immaculate one, I hymn thee, the majesty of the holy angels, and I pray: 
Drive far from me the repulsiveness of the phantasms of the demons, preserving 
my heart in tranquility. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
He Who is the Only-begotten of the Father, and is the one Person in two 
natures, Who alone united Himself to the form of flesh in thy womb, issued forth 
from thee without seed, and preserved unharmed thy precious virginity, О all-
immaculate one. 
Wash away the multitude of my sins with the magnitude of thy mercy, О good 
one, and save me, thy servant, who flee unto thee and with faith entreat thy 
mercy. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
When Thou wast buffeted, Thou didst smite the venomous malice of the 
serpent; and when Thou wast suspended upon the Tree, О only Mighty One, 
Thou didst enlighten all to cry: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Having tasted of the Tree, Adam, the first man, found death; but when Christ, 
the new Adam, died on the Tree, He granted us immortal life, slaying the greatly 
crafty servant. 
To the martyrs: Enduring suffering, О martyrs, ye were borne up to the Lord 
by your torment, and ye stood on the firm rock of faith, casting down all the 
wicked malice of the enemy at the command of God. 
To the martyrs: Illumined by your sufferings, О spiritual athletes, ye shine 
forth more brightly than the sun; having destroyed all the powers of darkness, and 
chanting to Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: “When Thou wast suspended upon the Cross, Thou didst alter all 
creation, О Thou who art immutable in Thy divinity,” said the Virgin to her Son. 
And seeing these things, she wept, marveling at Thy great long-suffering. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
The Uncircumscribable One, Who sitteth in the bosom of the Father, now 
sitteth, circumscribed, in thy bosom, О most pure one, clad in thy form, that as 
the new Adam He might save Adam. 
Cease not to entreat our God the Lover of mankind, О all-immaculate one, 
that we may receive the ultimate forgiveness of evils, and may obtain the good 
things prepared in the heavens for those who love Him. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
We bless thee, О most immaculate one, who hast given birth to the blessed 
Lord, Who with divine blessings crowneth human nature, and maketh new what 
before had grown old. 
Enriched at the havens of thy salvation, О pure one, we are saved from the 
storm; and holding our faith in thee to be the strength of our soul, we cry: Blessed 
art thou who hast given birth to God in the flesh! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Lifted up upon the Tree in humility of heart, О God Most High, Thou didst 
humble the most prideful serpent, and raised up Adam, who had been brought 
low by the passions, О Compassionate One. 
Given gall to eat when Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, Thou didst 
transform the ancient bitterness, О compassionate Master, sweetness of all, Who 
art hypostatic Life. 
To the martyrs: Ye did not bend your knee before graven images, О all-praised 
ones, but were sacrificed like unblemished lambs; and ye brought low the might of 
the evil one, hymning Christ throughout the ages. 
To the martyrs: Ye were shown to be temples of the living Spirit, О martyrs, 
and ye cast down the temples of the idols and were caught up to the heavenly 
temple, hymning Christ throughout the ages. 
Theotokion: Jacob beheld thee beforehand, О Virgin, as the ladder leading up 
to the heights of heaven us who have plunged headlong into the abyss of evils; 
wherefore, we bless thee, the pure one, throughout the ages. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
We confess thee to be the true Theotokos, and with the angel with faith we cry 
out to thee “Rejoice!”; for on behalf of those on earth thou alone hast given birth 
to Joy, О joyous, pure and blessed one. 
The divinely sounding harp of thine ancestor prefigured thee, who bore God 
in the flesh, as the all-holy ark, О all-immaculate one. Him do we supremely exalt 
throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
О divinely joyous maiden who knewest not wedlock, haven and hope of 
Christians amid the storm, deliver thy servants from perils, sufferings and 
afflictions, and from everlasting fire. 
When Thou shalt come in glory to judge all mankind, О Master, number me, a 
sinner, with the lambs on Thy right side, through the supplications of Thy 
Mother, that I may glorify Thee throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
О Lord of times and seasons, at noon Thou wast uplifted, crucified, upon the 
Tree in the midst of the earth, О only Long-suffering One, setting aright him who 
in the midst of paradise suffered the fall through the corrupting fruit. 
The Cross was lifted up, and the tyrant was dealt a mortal wound to his soul; 
those bound were released from corruption, and understanding was planted in all 
mankind; the enemy stood by, paralyzed, and all were filled with joy. 
To the martyrs: The earth was conjoined with the heavens, for Christ was 
sacrificed on the Cross, О martyrs of the Lord; and He drew unto Him the 
multitude of you who endured a multitude of extreme torments, and caused you 
to shine forth with the multitude of His divine ministers. 
To the martyrs: Shining with immaterial light, ye became gods by adoption, О 
martyrs of the Lord, making your abode in the mansions of the firstborn, full of 
eternal glory; wherefore, we, the faithful, honor you as is meet. 
Theotokion: “An awesome birthgiving did I endure, О long-suffering Master, 
when I gave birth to Thee in a strange manner. For when creation beheld Thee 
willingly crucified upon the Tree, it was filled with fear,” the immaculate one cried 
out maternally weeping, whom we magnify. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
When He became incarnate, the Son and Word of God Who is without 
beginning became the Son of the Virgin; and at the good pleasure of the Father 
and by the activity of the divine Spirit, He hath wholly restored my corrupted 
nature. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Arise, О my soul, and be vigilant in prayer and in all good things; with fervor 
casting aside the idleness of sleep, and ever having as a watchful protector the 
pure Mother of God, whom we glorify. 
О all-immaculate Theotokos, thou art the hope, protection and joy of the 
faithful; wherefore, I beseech thy compassions: Enlighten my soul, which the 
gloom of many sins and evil thoughts have darkened. 
О holy and divinely joyous Virgin: Open unto me the gates of light, lest the 
night of sin cover me; and guide my life to the calm harbor of the divine precepts 
of Him Who became man through thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VI: 
I trust in the Cross, О Christ, and, boasting therein, I cry out: О Lord and 
Lover of mankind, cast down the pride of those who do not confess Thee to be 
both God and man! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Protected by the Cross, we set ourselves against the enemy, undaunted by his 
wiles and treachery; for the prideful one hath been set at naught and trampled 
underfoot by the power of Christ Who was nailed upon the Tree. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: The memory of the martyrs is a joy to those who fear the 
Lord; for, having suffered for the sake of Christ, they have received crowns from 
Him; and they now pray with boldness on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: When, of old, the unblemished ewe-lamb and immaculate 
Lady, * beheld her Lamb * upon the tree of the Cross, * she exclaimed maternally, 
and marveling cried aloud: * “O my Child most sweet, * what is this new and 
most strange sight I see? * How hath the thankless synagogue * betrayed Thee to 
the judgment-seat of Pilate * and condemned Thee to death, * Who art the Life of 
all? * Yet do I hymn Thine ineffable condescension, ** O Word!”  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE VI  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VI 
Remember me, О God my Savior, when Thou shalt come in Thy kingdom, 
and save me, in that Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Thou wast willingly lifted up upon the Tree, О only greatly Merciful One, and 
didst call forth those who had stumbled into the abyss of evils. 
The earth quaked and the sun hid its light, beholding Thee, the Sun of 
righteousness, upon the Tree, willingly suffering. 
To the martyrs: Sharing in the sufferings of the Savior, О passion-bearers, 
together ye partake of divine effulgence, and are deified. 
Glory ..., Lift me up from the depths of sin, О my Christ, Who, though One 
of the Trinity, didst willingly endure crucifixion. 
Both now ..., Standing before the Cross, О Virgin Mother, and beholding thy 
Son willingly suffering, thou didst magnify Him. 
 
Prokeimenon, the hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
 
