--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE VI 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “On the third day ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Ye became ministers of the great mysteries of God, О theologians and God-
beholding disciples, and having received the grace of healing, ye cure the diseases 
of all. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Ye are the great refuge and protection of our souls and the expulsion of evil 
spirits, О God-beholding apostles of the Lord, wherefore, we ever honor you. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
From every evil circumstance, from harm wrought by the demons, from 
transgressions and wretched captivity, deliver those who honor you with faith, О 
divine and blessed apostles. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О blessed Nicholas, have pity on me who fall prostrate, I beseech thee, and 
enlighten the eyes of my soul, that I may gaze with purity upon the compassionate 
Bestower of light. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
As thou hast boldness before God, О holy one, deliver me from the enemy 
who seeks to oppress me. О blessed hierarch Nicholas, save me from harm and 
deliver me from men of blood. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
We, the faithful, have now acquired thee as a calm haven, an unassailable 
rampart, a pillar of strength, a door to repentance, and the guide and bulwark of 
our souls, О holy hierarch. 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Envying thy flock, О most pure one, the wicked adversary ever striveth to 
make it his food; but do thou, О Theotokos, deliver us from his harm. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VI: 
Once, the apostles trolled the depths of the sea with nets, О Lord, and likewise 
the heights of the kingdom for the sake of their doctrines. In the first, they 
skillfully tested the unfathomable depths; and in the other they attained through 
faith Thine infinite bosom, and they proclaimed Thy timeless Son to the world. By 
their supplications and those of all the saints, have mercy on us. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Once, when Thy disciples were tempest-tossed in a boat, О Christ, they cried 
out: “O Master, save us! For we are perishing!” And we now cry aloud: We pray 
Thee О our Savior and Lover of mankind, deliver us from our tribulations! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Thy Cross was the invincible weapon of the martyrs, О Lord; 
for they looked upon imminent death, foreseeing the life which is to come, and 
they were strengthened by hope in Thee. By their prayers have mercy upon us! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The eye of my heart longingly seeketh thee, * O Lady; disdain not my feeble 
sigh. * At the hour when thy Son shall judge the world, ** be thou my protection 
and helper.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE VI  
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My 
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him * 
for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
How can I, who am wholly sunk in the passions, wretch that I am, and am 
clothed in impurities, approach thee, О pure one? Yet, taking pity, save mine 
accursed soul, О most pure Birthgiver of God. 
Arising out of the depths of shame, О my lowly soul, cry aloud with fervor to 
her who alone is pure: Have mercy upon me, О most immaculate and pure 
maiden, and deliver me from the passions! 
Glory ..., I have been engulfed by a storm of perils and sins; but extend now 
thy helping hand unto me, О pure one, and deliver me from the indignity of the 
passions, that I may ever glorify thee. 
Both now ..., Deliver me from the cruel tempest of sin, whereby I have been 
wholly defiled, О Birthgiver of God. As I flee unto thee, lighten now the burden 
of my transgressions. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my 
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord. 
О most immaculate one, make me young who have aged through the shameful 
passions of sin, easing the bonds of my transgressions. 
Cleanse me of the mire and filth of sin, О Theotokos, and make a divine 
temple of me who flee to thee who art pure. 
Glory ..., Awake thou from the sleep of despondency, О my wretched soul, 
and lift up thine eyes to the divine Bride and maiden who alone saveth thee. 
Both now ..., In desperation and contrition, I hasten and fly to thy fervent 
supplication, О Lady: Save me, thy servant, О pure one! 
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. * 
How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * and 
he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
I shall rightly be judged by thy Son for my words and deeds, О most 
immaculate Birthgiver of God. May I find thee at that hour to be a refuge and 
most mighty ally, saving me from all torments. 
My life is vile, my character is rendered impure through sins, and I am wholly 
sunk in the passions. О pure one, cleanse me of the defilement of my 
transgressions, and make me as white as snow by thy mediation before our tender-
hearted God. 
Glory ..., I am bound all over by the bonds of mine offenses, and am unable to 
move toward the paths of repentance. Stretch forth thy hand, О most immaculate 
one, and direct me to the path which leadeth me to the way of salvation. 
Both now ..., By thy prayers free me from cruel torments, from the outermost 
darkness and Gehenna, О Virgin; for thou hast the will and power so to do, О 
thou who hast given birth to the Lord Who alone is supremely good. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O 
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach me, 
O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
On the day of judgment reveal thyself, О Lady, and stand as an advocate for 
me, freeing me from torments and fire, that, saved, I may hymn thine invincible 
grace. 
Seeing that I have wandered away from thy protection, О Lady, the enemy 
hath cast my soul into the depths of transgressions, and beholding me he laughs 
me to scorn; but do thou help me. 
Glory ..., Make mine accursed and passion-plagued soul to arise, I beseech 
thee, О pure and most immaculate one, and remove from it the weight of its 
many sins. 
Both now ..., I offer thee entreaty from my defiled and impure lips, О most 
immaculate one: Take pity on me by thy prayers, I beseech thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate 
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised up 
my life from corruption. 
Accept me who am prodigal and most accursed, О Master Christ, and free me 
from torments through the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee, and deliver me 
from standing on Thy left side. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
The dark fear of hell embraces me, О pure one, and the lot of the goats doth 
terrify me. Deliver me from such things, О most pure Theotokos, I pray thee. 
Glory ..., Mortifying the passions of my flesh, О pure Lady Theotokos, impart 
life to my most wretched soul, and guide me to the straight path. 
Both now ..., Though I am a fool, yet I offer thee the supplication of a servant, 
and I flee to thy compassionate loving-kindness. Turn me not away ashamed, О 
pure one. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
I offer thee groaning from my heart and the depths of my being, О most 
immaculate one, asking thy right conciliatory aid. Have mercy upon my passionate 
soul, and move the greatly merciful God to pity, that He may deliver me from 
damnation and the lake of fire, О thou who alone art blessed. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil 
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but 
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 
Knowing thee, to be the merciful and right loving Virgin Mother, and wholly 
pure, I flee to thee, wretch that I am. Turn me not away from thee ashamed, О 
all-immaculate one. 
Awaken, О passion-plagued soul! Arise, О wretched one! Beat thou thy breast, 
and from thine innermost depths send forth fountains of tears, that the Mother of 
Christ God may have mercy upon thee who art accursed. 
Glory ..., Of old I became a temple of God through divine baptism, but I have 
wholly defiled myself, wretch that I am, and am grievously brought low through 
terrible falls. Yet do thou raise me up, О most immaculate one, thou hope of the 
despairing. 
Both now ..., A dense cloud hath covered my heart, and darkness and gloom 
hath come upon my passion-plagued soul. О Bride of God, illumine me with rays 
of repentance, that I may glorify thee. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom tremble 
the cherubim and seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * praise, 
bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The river of fire terrifies me, and thick darkness causes me to quake; the worm 
and the gnashing of teeth fill me with horror. Virgin, at that hour may I find thee 
to be a mighty ally. 
Let me not become fuel for the fire, О Lord, neither let me hear Thy voice 
pronounce sentence, for I have Thy pure Mother beseeching Thee. I cry to Thee: 
By her prayers have mercy upon me. 
Glory ..., Make me to hear the divine voice, and show me to share a place with 
the elect, О Christ; let me not occupy a place of lamentation, for I have the 
Theotokos beseeching Thee for this. 
Both now ..., Send streams of tears now down upon me, and cause groaning to 
erupt within me from the depth of my soul, О pure one, that I may ever fall down 
before thy protection and receive the remission of my sins through thy prayer. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth of 
God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship and 
magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
The day of judgment terrifies me, О Virgin; the gnashing of teeth fills my 
heart with dread, and the place where the goats stand horrifies me; but let me find 
thee, the Theotokos, to be my help amid evils when I shall be judged. 
Trembling doth now seize me, and the horror of Gehenna terrifies me. What 
shall I do? I know not, accursed and condemned as I am. Therefore, I flee unto 
thee and cry out with fervent compunction: Disdain me not, О most pure one! 
Glory ..., Beholding the judgment-seat, I think upon thy judgment, О my 
Christ, whereat I, who am condemned, shall be rightly judged for my deeds. Yet 
may I have as an advocate in that hour - Thy Mother, the divine Bride - entreating 
Thy great compassions. 
Both now ..., Noetically touching thy feet, О all-immaculate one, I beseech 
thee: Accept my lamentation, hearken to my hymnody, and grant me remission of 
transgressions through thy supplications, I pray thee, that I may magnify thee with 
love. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion, and the 
rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VI  
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone VI:  
As Thou didst come into the midst of Thy disciples, О Savior, bestowing Thy 
peace upon them, come amongst us, and save us. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
The choir of Thy disciples enlightened the whole world; for having once been 
fishermen, they became fishers of men. For their sake, О God, have mercy on us! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Great is the multitude of my many transgressions, О Theotokos. Unto thee 
have I fled, О pure one, in need of salvation. Visit mine ailing soul, and entreat 
thy Son and our God, that He grant me forgiveness for the evils I have done, О 
thou only blessed one. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI: 
Sent unto the ends of the earth, О Savior, Thy disciples piously fished for the 
nations as for fish, and brought them to Thy goodness. Wherefore, for their sake 
we cry out to Thee, О Christ: Grant great mercy to Thy people! 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
The twelve apostles, twelve times radiant, have appeared to the earth like the 
sun. For their sake Thou didst cause the planter of deception to wither up, and for 
their sake Thou dost illumine the souls of Thy servants. Save us for their sake, in 
that Thou art full of tender compassion! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: The memory of Thy saints hath appeared today like the 
paradise in Eden, О Lord; for therein all creation rejoiceth, and by their prayers 
Thou hast granted us peace and great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О all-holy Theotokos, throughout my lifetime forsake me not, to human 
protection entrust me not; but do thou thyself defend and have mercy on me. 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Like lightning hath the saving proclamation of Thy most wise disciples gone 
forth into all the earth, О Christ, enlightening those in darkness and evil, and 
making us children of the day and the light; wherefore, all creation piously 
glorifies Thee. 
Trading their boats for the net of the divine Faith, the fishermen drew forth all 
mankind from the depths of vainglory, gaving unto God those who are pious and 
ever magnify Him. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O holy Lady, pure Mother of our God, * who didst ineffably give birth unto 
the Creator of all; * with the sacred apostles ever entreat His goodness, * that He 
deliver us from the passions ** and grant us the remission of sins.  
ODE I 
Canon of the holy, glorious and all-famed apostles, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
О divinely eloquent ones, who became a light unto the world, illumine us with 
splendid radiance; and deliver us from the night of the passions and the gloom of 
temptations, О divinely blessed ones. (Twice)  
With honor the Spirit set you as honored princes throughout the whole world, 
О disciples of the Lord; wherefore, as ye vanquished the prince of the air, deliver 
the faithful. 
Like coals burning with immaterial fire, О most wise ones, utterly consume my 
material passions, guiding me to the light of dispassion and life. 
Theotokion: Through the supplications of the apostles, prophets and martyrs, 
and of the pure one who gave birth to Thee, О Lord Jesus, King of all, have pity 
on those who have sinned against Thee. 
Another canon, of the holy hierarch Nicholas the wonderworker, the acrostic 
whereof is “Accept my sixth hymn, О Nicholas,” the composition of Joseph, in 
Tone VI: 
Irmos: The lecherous Pharaoh was drowned with all his warriors, * and 
Israel, crossing through the midst of the sea, * cried aloud exclaiming: * 
Let us chant unto the Lord God, * for He hath been glorified! 

--- PAGE 9 ---
О most wise father, who dwellest joyfully in the heavens: By thy mediation 
dispel every vexation of the evil one from the hearts of those who together hymn 
Thee with faith on earth. 
О father Nicholas, those who with faith have recourse to thy holy protection 
do thou strengthen now against the harmful passions, the corrupting foe and all 
the malice of the deceiver. 
With the therapy of thy prayers, О Nicholas, cure us who have been wounded 
by invisible darts, that we may walk the paths of the Lord in health. 
Theotokion: The Son Who is equally eternal with the Father hath in these 
latter times desired to make His abode within thy womb, О Theotokos, for the 
regeneration of us, the faithful; wherefore, we hymn thee. 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
The divine Spirit, giving fire to your tongues by His dread coming, hath 
through you restored to life those who are broken, О glorious apostles. (Twice) 
What mercy shall I, who sin in mind, find on the day of judgment? Wherefore, 
I cry unto Thee: For the sake of Thy disciples, have pity on me, who am self-
condemned! 
О glorious apostles, who emulated the saving sufferings of Christ, as 
physicians heal ye the cruel temporal passions of my soul. 
Theotokion: For the sake of the Theotokos and Thine apostles, О Christ, 
grant conversion to me, the sinner; have mercy upon me, as Thou art God, and 
free me from everlasting fire, О Savior. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Having established my thoughts upon the firm rock of Thy Faith, * 
make steadfast my soul, О Lord; * for I have Thee as my refuge * and 
confirmation, * О good One. 
Thou didst clearly receive victory over the soul-corrupting passions, О all- 
blessed Nicholas. By thy prayers deliver us who are ever badly vanquished by 
them. 
Having mortified thy carnal members by asceticism, thou didst pass over to 
the life which waxeth not old, О wise one. Pray thou that we who praise thee 
joyfully may likewise receive it. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Cease not to visit us from the heights of heaven, О holy hierarch, By thy 
prayers unto God dispelling all the difficulties of life. 
Theotokion: Ever driving all gloom from our souls By thy prayers, О pure 
one, beseech the Redeemer, that He grant us remission of sins. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
О right calm havens, harbors safe from storms, steer me to the tranquil haven 
for I am tempest-tossed by the threefold waves of grievous transgressions. 
(Twice) 
Sigh, О my soul! Shed tears, О my soul! My lowly heart hath in nowise cleaved 
unto the good One, that God may deliver thee from the coming flame and 
torment. 
Entreat the Savior and Lord, О all-blessed apostles who were high priests 
among men, that He save us from evil temptations, in that He is the Lover of 
mankind. 
Theotokion: О most pure Virgin, immaculate Virgin, with the apostles 
supplicate for us, that we may be delivered from grievous temptations and 
misfortunes. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the report of Thee * and was afraid; * I have 
seen Thy works and was amazed. * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Entreating our God, the Bestower of good things, О holy Nicholas, heal mine 
uncorrected heart, which hath been wounded by the deceiver. 
Thou didst demolish the temples of perdition, О favorite of Christ; wherefore, 
I entreat thee with faith, О Nicholas: Destroy thou the evil idols of my mind! 
Through righteous works thou didst become fragrant myrrh, О divinely wise 
one, adorning thy throne in Myra, О holy hierarch father Nicholas. 
Theotokion: О unwedded Lady, blessed Birthgiver of God: From all harm 
save those who hymn thee, О only helper of mankind. 
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О disciples of the Word, who manifestly traveled the way which leadeth to life 
by the exceeding narrow path of temptations and tribulations: Smooth ye the path 
of my soul. (Twice) 
О apostles of Christ, ye luminaries of the divine East, deliver me from the 
darkness of the passions and the gloom of pleasures, temptations, evil 
circumstances, tempest and misfortunes. 
О apostles, ye scrolls who beheld God, pray that I may be enrolled in the 
Book of Life, by your prayers rending asunder the evil record of my sins. 
Theotokion: By the supplications to thy Son of thee and the divine apostles, О 
only all-hymned maiden, save me who trust in thee, О my salvation and hope, the 
unashamed hope of all. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: О Christ Who shineth Thy light upon the world, * illumine my heart 
* for I cry out to Thee in the night, * and save me. 
By thy mediations, О Nicholas, earnestly wake me who am stuck fast by the 
slumber of slothfulness. 
Entreat Jesus the Savior, О holy hierarch Nicholas, that He deliver me from 
everlasting torment. 
By thy prayers, О holy hierarch Nicholas, preserve me from the hindrances of 
the world and from the vexation of the demons. 
Theotokion: He Who hath granted us existence made His abode within thee, 
О Theotokos. Him do thou entreat, that He save us. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
О glorious ones, ye truly and clearly had within your souls the honorable laws, 
like tablets graven by the Spirit, and thereby abolished the law in the Scriptures, 
saving the world. (Twice) 
О sinful soul who hath insanely enslaved thyself to evil habits, turn and be 
converted, and cry out to the compassionate Lord: For the sake of the apostles, О 
Word, save me! 

--- PAGE 12 ---
At Thine awesome and dread coming, number me among Thy chosen sheep 
on Thy right hand, through the prayers of Thy divine preachers, О innocent 
Lamb Who wast slain for all. 
Theotokion: The choirs of incorporeal servants beseeches Thee, О 
beginningless Son of God, and with her who gave birth to Thee the assemblies of 
the disciples entreats Thee: Grant Thy mercies unto Thy people! 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Slain by the sea-monster of sin, * I cry unto Thee, О Christ: * Free 
me from corruption, * as Thou didst the prophet. 
Possessing thee as a noetic lamp, О Nicholas, creation is enlightened with the 
rays of innumerable miracles. 
О Nicholas, tireless advocate for those who have recourse unto thee, deliver 
me from the evil sleep of slothfulness. 
Of old, О wise one, thou didst deliver those who were to be unjustly put to 
death. In like manner deliver me also from misfortunes and transgressions, О 
Nicholas. 
Theotokion: О only pure and joyous Virgin, help me who am ever tempest-
tossed by the perils of life. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Drawing all mankind forth from the depths of delusion with the hook of the 
word, О apostles, ye brought them to the Word Who was slain for our sake, 
chanting unto Him: Blessed is the God of our fathers! (Twice) 
Having conversed directly with Him Who revealed Himself in a material body, 
О apostles, ye were enlightened by His luminous brilliance; wherefore, enlighten 
me who cry aloud: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
Entreat the good Shepherd, О divine disciples, that He seek me who am lost 
among the mountains of disobedience and save me who earnestly cries aloud: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: With the prophets, apostles and martyrs entreat Him to Whom 
thou hast given birth, О Virgin, that He deliver me from the evils of earth; and 
grant that I may share in the good things of heaven, О Lady. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Hearkening to the hymnody of Thy venerable children * Thou didst 
bedew the burning furnace: * О Lord God of our fathers blessed art Thou! 
With the power of God thou didst trample hordes of heretics underfoot, О all-
blessed Nicholas, saving thy flock from their deceit. 
О father Nicholas, who appeared to those at sea, thou didst also feed thy 
suffering city. By thy prayers deliver me from soul corrupting famine. 
By thy prayers, О father Nicholas, make steadfast those who call upon thee for 
aid, stilling the evil storm of the demons. 
Theotokion: О Sovereign Lady of all mankind, holy Theotokos, By thy prayers 
utterly free me from slavery to the passions. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
With the scythe of your prayers mow down all the tares of my mind, О divine 
husbandmen, apostles of the Savior, that I may produce as grain the fruit of 
salvation. (Twice) 
With the plough of the word ye cultivated hardened hearts, О ye who beheld 
God; and, having sown precious doctrine therein, ye reaped the saved an 
hundredfold. 
Having lulled the malice of the enemy to sleep, ye fell into sleep like that of 
the righteous, becoming unsleeping advocates for us, О disciples of the Word, 
throughout all ages. 
Theotokion: By the supplications of the prophets and martyrs, of Thine 
apostles and her who ineffably contained Thee within her womb, the Virgin who 
knew not a man, О Lord, deliver me from the unquenchable fire. 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: Thy venerable Children in the furnace * likened to the cherubim * 
chanted the thrice-holy hymn * Bless ye, praise ye and supremely exalt ye 
the Lord throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Known to the whole world, thou didst appear hastening to the heights of an 
exceedingly radiant life, О God-bearing Nicholas, enlightening those in darkness 
with divers miracles. 
Fill with grace those who keep divine vigil and honor thee, О Nicholas; and 
lull to sleep the malice of the adversaries who assail us, О blessed one. 
О holy hierarch Nicholas, as one who crushed all the snares of the enemy with 
the might of the Spirit, by thy prayers deliver me from them, piloting my life, О 
divinely wise one. 
Theotokion: О Birthgiver of God, we hymn thee for whose sake the curse was 
annulled and blessing hath come upon all who acknowledge thee to be the only 
unwedded Mother of our God. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Preaching throughout the world God, Who entered into fellowship with us 
and deified our mortal substance beyond compare, ye freed all from ungodly 
delusion; wherefore, ye are ever blessed, О divine apostles. (Twice) 
О apostles who depicted the suffering of Christ in your own divers bodily 
sufferings, mortify the passions of my flesh and bring to life my soul, which is 
ailing, afflicted and dying. 
Be Thou the path guiding me who have fallen into the abyss of sin, to the 
unerring path of Thy commandments, for I have become lost, having taken evil 
paths, and am afflicted, О Lover of mankind. 
Theotokion: The choir of the angels and archangels, authorities and powers, 
principalities, dominions, cherubim, seraphim and thrones, with the assembly of 
the apostles and her who gave birth to Thee, beseech Thee, О only King: Save 
Thy servants! 
Canon of the holy hierarch  
Irmos: О Virgin who received the angel’s salutation * and hast given birth 
to thine own Creator, * save those who magnify thee. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
О Nicholas, adornment of holy hierarchs and wellspring of miracles, pray to 
God the Lover of mankind, that we be granted remission of sins. 
As of old thou didst deliver the prisoners from death, so do thou deliver us 
from the temptations of life, О Nicholas. 
Thou wast buried in Myra of Lycia, О Nicholas, and always pouring forth 
myrrh, О Nicholas, ever dispel thou the fetid stench of the passions. 
The coming of the Creator is nigh at hand. Be not idle, О my soul, but cry 
aloud: Through the prayers of Nicholas, О Christ, save me! 
Theotokion: О all-hymned one, who hast given birth to the Savior, enlighten 
the blinded eye of my heart, that, saved through thee, I may hymn thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VI: 
Wisely transforming the tempest of demonic delusion into tranquility, О 
apostles of Christ, ye guided the whole world to the Orthodox Faith, and pray 
now on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
О ye faithful, with hymns let us fittingly honor the memory of the most wise 
disciples of Christ our King; for in the world they proclaimed faith in the Trinity. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Our God hath made wondrous His chosen saints. Rejoice and 
be glad, all ye, His servants, in that crowns and His kingdom have been made 
ready for you! We beseech you, to not forget us! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The recovery of the sorrowful * and the release of the ailing art thou, * O all-
hymned Theotokos. * Save this city and people, * O pacification of those who are 
embattled, * the quietude of the tempest-tossed, ** who alone art the intercession 
of the faithful.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VI  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VI: 
Remember me, О God my Savior, when Thou shalt come in Thy kingdom, 
and save me, in that Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Traversing the world like mystical rays, О glorious apostles, with faith ye 
enlightened the race of mankind. 
О enlightened apostles of the Lord, like clouds ye rained down upon the world 
the water of divine knowledge. 
To the martyrs: Approaching the fire of torment, О martyrs, ye received from 
God a divine dew which cooled you. 
Glory ..., Worshipping the holy and adored Trinity, О ye faithful, let us cry out 
together: By the supplications of the apostles, save us all! 
Both now ..., О Theotokos, who in manner past all telling hast given birth to 
the Word Who with the Father is equally without beginning, entreat Him, that our 
souls may be saved. 
 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
 
