--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY EVENING: TONE VI  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the righteous ones, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Walking in the footsteps of the sufferings of Christ, the whole company of the 
martyrs mightily went forth to many struggles. They confessed Him as God 
before ungodly tyrants and iniquitous kings, and endured many tortures, in the 
hope of receiving heavenly honors. These they now behold, rejoicing, and 
standing before the Lord with the choirs of all the incorporeal hosts. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
О all-sacred shepherds, ye were emulators of the Christ, the Chief Shepherd, 
and preserved utterly unharmed the divinely chosen flock, the divine treasures of 
piety, driving away the wild wolves, and bringing them into the fold of heaven. As 
ye make your abode there, remember those who praise you with love, and pray ye 
with boldness unto Christ on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
О all ye venerable fathers, who living in holiness, vanquished the demons; and 
extinguishing the torments of conscience, valiantly endured the burning of the 
passions, О blessed ones, and ye rejoice now with the heavenly hosts of 
incorporeal beings; for in the flesh ye emulated their life. With them entreat 
Christ, the supremely good God, that we who honor you may find deliverance 
from our falls. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy martyrs, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, denied Thee not, nor did they forsake Thy 
commandments; by their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Repeat: Thy martyrs, O Lord ..., 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
О martyred passion-bearers, citizens of heaven, who suffered on the earth, ye 
endured many torments. By their prayers and intercessions, О Lord, preserve us 
all. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion: 
Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who will not hymn thy 
most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who hath shone forth 
timelessly from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from thee, O pure 
one; * By nature He is God, by nature for our sakes, He hath become a man * not 
divided into two Hypostases, * but known in two natures without commingling. * 
Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise up 
against me redeem me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VI: 
To the martyrs: Those who suffered martyrdom for Thee, O Christ, endured a 
multitude of torments, and have received perfect crowns in the heavens, may they 
ever intercede on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
To the martyrs: Thy Cross O Lord, was the invincible weapon of the martyrs. 
They beheld impending death before them; but, foreseeing the life that is to come, 
they became strengthened with hope in Thee. By their intercessions have mercy 
on us. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: Thy command was to me my beginning and foundation. For 
desiring to fashion me into a living creature from natures visible and invisible: 
Thou didst form my body from the earth, and given me a soul by Thy divine and 
quickening breath. Wherefore, O Christ, grant rest to Thy servants in the land of 
the living, in the habitations of the righteous. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
 
By the prayers of her that gaveth birth to Thee O Christ,* and of Thy martyrs 
and apostles, * the prophets and holy hierarchs, * the venerable, the righteous and 
of all the saints, ** grant rest to Thy departed servants.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
FRIDAY NIGHT: TONE VI 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My 
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him * 
for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Reject me not, О good one, neither abominate nor despise me who with 
fervor hasten beneath thy tender compassion, О pure one, but grant that I may 
share in the grace which resides in thee. 
O good Theotokos, helper of the sorrowful, accept the sighing which issueth 
forth from my soul, and deliver me from all the shameless evils I have grievously 
committed. 
Glory ..., Before thee do I fall down, О good one, thou intercessor for the 
troubled. From everlasting fire, from darkness and the abyss deliver me who have 
lived my whole life in evil. 
Both now ..., Woe is me! How can I who have immeasurably sinned before 
entreat Thee, О my Jesus? Yet I offer Thee as a mediatress the pure one who gave 
birth to Thee. Have mercy and save me! 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my 
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord. 
I fall down before thee, О Mother of the Word. In thy compassion accept 
me, and by thy fervent prayers grant forgiveness of sins unto me who beseech 
thee. 
Have mercy upon me, О Lady, have mercy upon me, and deliver me from all 
wickedness, from the oppression of the demons and everlasting torment. 
Glory ..., Restrain me who am smitten with the bitterness of lusts, О Lady, 
granting me the divine sobriety of repentance and saving conversion. 
Both now ..., О Birthgiver of God, who ineffably gave birth to the Lord and 
Creator of all things, entreat Him to save thy flock. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. * 
How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * and 
he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to Thy 
power, O Lord. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Constantly picking at the sores brought upon my soul by the love of 
sensuality, and in pain from the stripes they cause me, I lie lacking feeling and 
unhealed. О Birthgiver of God, have mercy and heal me, and save me By thy 
prayers. 
The darkness of sin hath covered my soul, О Birthgiver of God, such that I go 
about in the light as though it were night, not knowing the commandments of 
Christ. О thou who hast given birth to the divine Light, have mercy upon me and 
enlighten me, I pray. 
Glory ..., The Word of the living God descended into thy womb, О Virgin 
Mother and, receiving my substance through thy most pure blood, He came forth 
in two natures, but a single hypostasis. Him do thou beseech, that He save our 
souls. 
Both now ..., I have assiduously gone through the desires of the body and all 
pleasures, and have thereby become wholly corrupt, vile and abominable. О most 
pure Birthgiver of God, have mercy, and save me in thy tender compassion. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O 
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach me, 
O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
I have kindled for myself the fire of Gehenna, doing that which is shameful, 
and have grievously brought upon myself the wrath of God. Help me, О pure 
one, and forsake me not. 
Though I am ever asking for the remission of my transgressions, yet I never 
cease committing exceedingly wicked deeds, О most pure one, and I offend thee. 
О purification of the faithful, have pity on me! 
Glory ..., О pure one, entreat Jesus, to Whom thou hast given birth through 
thy blood - perfect man and true God - that we be delivered from everlasting fire. 
Both now ..., О impassable gate, open unto me the portals of true repentance, 
I pray, and show me the path of penitence, О pure one, thou guide of all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate 
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised 
my life up from corruption. 
Waves of shameful thoughts now engulf me; yet do thou guide me to the calm 
harbor of true repentance by thy tender compassion, О Lady. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Having acquired thee as our hope and unassailable rampart, our steadfast 
intercessor, О maiden, we are delivered from transgressions and grievous 
passions, and from all harm. 
Glory ..., О pure Virgin Theotokos, I fall down before thee and cry out in 
lamentation: Deliver my wretched soul from the judgment which is to come, and 
from everlasting fire. 
Both now ..., In thy supplications thou art the strength of those who are faint 
of soul, О most pure one; wherefore, disdain me not, but heal me who am sick of 
soul. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VI: 
In the loving-kindness of Thy compassions Thou didst come down to earth, 
О Christ, and became incarnate from the Virgin, sanctifying all on earth and 
calling them to heaven; wherefore, trusting in Thee, we no longer sin, but are 
freed from cares by Thee: for Thou art our Savior, Creator and God. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil 
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but 
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 
When mine accursed soul will have to endure separation from my body, there 
will be no one to deliver or comfort it; do thou then stand forth, О Lady, and 
deliver me from the oppression of the demons. 
I fall down before thee and offer thee fervent tears. I know thy love for 
mankind, I know thy long-suffering and guilelessness: have mercy upon me now, 
О pure one; forgive me and save me. 
Glory ..., О Virgin, have mercy on my wretched soul which is beset by the 
passions. Look upon the tumult of my passions, look upon the inconstant burning 
of my flesh, and grant me thy saving help and salvation. 
Both now ..., The Son and Word, Who is consubstantial and co-beginningless 
with the Father, received from thee flesh like thine, though immutably noetic and 
animate in a way He Himself knoweth; and therein He hath refashioned our 
nature into something higher, О pure Virgin, 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom tremble 
the cherubim and seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * praise, 
bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
I am at a loss when I consider my acts, and I tremble before the dread tribunal 
of the Judge. What answer shall I give at that time, wretch that I am? О Sovereign 
Lady of the world, be thou my helper. 
Turn not thy face away from me, О Lady, when I gaze upon thine image, but 
be merciful unto me, and avert from me the sentence which will be pronounced. 
Glory ..., О Mary, thou unwedded Bride of God, deliver me thy servant, from 
all the harm of the wicked one, I cry to thee, and at the coming trial stand before 
me as an advocate, О thou who alone art the intercessor for Christians. 
Both now ..., That He might deify mankind, О Lady, thy Son revealed Himself 
to be a perfect man through thee; wherefore, beseech Him, that He show me 
forth as wholly purified, and a partaker in His divine kingdom. 
ОDE IX 
Irmos: О Virgin who received the angel’s salutation * and hast given birth 
to thine own Creator, * save those who magnify thee. 
Thou alone art the intercessor for all mankind, О most pure one; thou art the 
bulwark of Christians, О pure one. Thee do I now set before Christ as a mediator 
for me, the lowly one, that By thy prayers He may have mercy on me, wretched as 
I am. 
I have committed deeds of the night, and the night of tortures should rightly 
now cover me, the vain one, and the retribution of hell should receive me; but as 
thou hast given birth to God the Judge, О pure Virgin, deliver me from all 
torment. 
Glory ..., I have wasted the time of my life in evils, I have drawn nigh unto the 
gates of Hades, but in nowise desire to enter therein. Help me, О good 
Theotokos, for I have placed my hope in thee. 
Both now ..., О right loving Lady, adornment of the angels and glory of the 
martyrs, with them pray that we find mercy and remission of our debts, and help 
us all to finish well the race of our life in the doing of good. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE VI 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Ever enlightened by Thee, and having extinguished the lamp of the infidels, 
like lamps the saints always shine forth light upon the righteous. By their prayers, 
О our Savior, light Thou my lamp, and save me, О Lord. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Having patiently endured the struggle of martyrdom, the saints received from 
Thee the honors of victory; having set at naught the intentions of the iniquitous, 
they received crowns of incorruption. For their sake be Thou entreated, О God, 
and grant us great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Thou Who called Thy Mother blessed, Thou didst willingly go to Thy 
suffering, and shine forth upon the Cross, desiring to seek out Adam, and saying 
to the angels: Rejoice with Me, for I have found the lost coin! О our God Who 
hast wisely ordered all things, glory be to Thee! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
To the martyrs: While the choirs of the incorporeal ones stood by, holding 
trophies of victory, and tyrants and kings were amazed, the most wise spiritual 
athletes showed forth a firm opposition amidst the wounds of torture, during their 
martyrdom at the tribunal, thereby casting down the apostate by their confession 
of Christ. О Lord Who strengthened them, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: The memorial of Thy saints, O Lord, hath appeared like the 
the garden of paradise in Eden, for therein all creation rejoiceth. By their prayers 
grant us peace and great mercy. 
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall 
deliver them out of them all. 
For the reposed: Truly all things are vanity; life is but a shadow and a dream: 
for in vain doth every mortal trouble himself, as the Scripture hath said, seeking to 
acquire the whole world, and then departing to the tomb, where kings and 
paupers are found together. Wherefore, O Christ God, grant rest to Thy departed 
servants in that Thou lovest mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
I offer thee sighs from the heart and my innermost being, and I pray for thy 
conciliatory help, О all-immaculate one, as saith the Scriptures. Have mercy on my 
passion-plagued soul, and entreat the greatly merciful God, that He deliver me 
from judgment and the lake of fire, О only blessed one. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy martyrs, hierarchs, the venerable, and the departed, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: The lecherous Pharaoh was drowned with all his warriors, * and 
Israel, crossing through the midst of the sea, * cried aloud exclaiming: * 
Let us chant unto the Lord God, * for He hath been glorified! 
Having enlightened those in darkness with your radiant intelligence and put to 
shame the impious tyrants, О martyrs, ye manifestly became victors, and have 
passed over to the never-waning Light. 
Resplendent in the beauties of the virtues, О holy hierarchs of Christ, ye 
choirs of the venerable, О only triumphal procession of the prophets and all the 
righteous, ye have entered the mansions of heaven. 
All the multitude of women who joined themselves unto Christ have with 
manly labors trampled underfoot him who by a grievous deception brought death 
upon Eve; wherefore they are blessed with divine hymns. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: О Christ Who in the beginning formed man out of 
the earth, in the habitations of the righteous, in places of ease, grant rest to the 
souls of Thy servants, we pray, in that Thou art supremely good. 
Both now ..., Thou hast been shown to be more sacred than the cherubim and 
the seraphim, О pure one who hast given birth to the Author of creation. Him do 
thou unceasingly entreat, that He have pity on thy servants, who glorify thee. 
Another canon, of the departed, the composition of Theophanes, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
In the chambers of heaven the valiant martyrs always beseech Thee, О Christ. 
Grant that the faithful whom Thou hast translated from the earth may receive 
everlasting good things. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
О Thou Who hast adorned all things, Thou didst form man’s living substance 
midway between lowliness and majesty; wherefore, grant rest to the souls of Thy 
servants, О Savior. 
Glory ..., In the beginning Thou didst set me to be a dweller and husbandman 
in the garden of paradise; yet Thou didst eject me, who broke Thy commandment; 
but grant rest to the souls of Thy servants, О Savior. 
Both now ..., He Who of old fashioned our first mother Eve from Adam’s rib 
is clothed in flesh through thy most pure womb; and therewith He hath destroyed 
the might of death, О pure one. 
ODE III. 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Having established my thoughts upon the firm rock of Thy Faith, * 
make steadfast my soul, О Lord; * for I have Thee as my refuge * and 
confirmation, * О good One. 
Subjected to bodily pangs, the spiritual athletes looked forward, rejoicing, to a 
painless reward; and they now dispel our many pangs with grace. 
Driving away the beasts of evil with steadfast mind, the divine hierarchs 
delivered the godly children of Christ unharmed by their malice. 
Having mortified carnal-mindedness, the choir of the venerable, willingly 
bowing under the yoke of the Lord, received life everlasting. 
Glory ...,For the reposed: From everlasting fire, О Christ, deliver those who 
have passed from this life in piety, and grant them remission of debts and eternal 
delight, О good One. 
Both now ..., The women who loved Christ, surrounding thee who ineffably 
gave birth unto Him, О all-holy Lady, rejoice and are glad with a joyous mind. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Having suffered lawfully and been adorned by Thee with crowns of victory, 
Thy martyrs, О Bestower of life, earnestly ask that everlasting honor be given 
unto the faithful who have passed away. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Having first with many miracles and signs instructed me, the lost one, in latter 
times Thou didst abase Thyself as One compassionate; and having searched, Thou 
didst find and save me. 
Glory ..., They who come to Thee from the one who poureth forth unstable 
corruption do Thou cause to dwell joyously in the eternal mansions, О good One, 
justifying them by faith and grace. 
Both now ..., There is none as immaculate as thee, О most pure Mother of 
God; for thou alone didst conceive in thy womb the true God Who is from 
before the ages, and hath destroyed the power of death. 
ODE IV 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the report of Thee * and was afraid; * I have 
seen Thy works and was amazed. * Glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
Standing fast, the passion-bearers beheld the prideful one trampled under their 
feet; and in thanksgiving they glorified the Creator of all things. 
Armed with the splendors of words, the holy hierarchs save all from the 
darkness of heresies, leading them to the light of understanding. 
The venerable ones, consuming the material passions with an ardent 
understanding of God, were revealed to be burning coals, and are greatly glorified. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: О Lord Who hast dominion over the living and the 
dead, unto those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself grant rest with all who have 
been well-pleasing unto Thee. 
Both now ..., О most pure one, the Lord Who ineffably clothed Himself in 
flesh from thee hath taken to Himself the company of women who struggled 
manfully . 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Revealing knowledge greater than wisdom and the most perfect goodness of 
spiritual gifts, О Master, Thou didst unite the choirs of the martyrs to the angels. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Grant that those who have passed over to Thee may receive Thy most pure 
glory, О Christ, wherein are the dwelling-places of those who are glad and the 
voices of pure rejoicing. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Those who hymn Thy divine might do Thou receive, taking them 
from this earth and making them children of the Light, and cleansing them of the 
darkness of sin, О greatly Merciful One. 
Both now ..., The Master chose thee as the most pure receptacle, the 
immaculate temple, the most holy ark, the virginal place of sanctity, the beauty of 
Jacob. 
ODE V 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: О Christ Who shineth Thy light upon the world, * illumine my heart 
* for I cry out to Thee in the night, * and save me. 
Clothing yourselves in vesture woven of grace from on high, О spiritual 
athletes, ye stripped the enemy naked. 
We honor the holy prophets, the divinely wise hierarchs, and the venerable 
who were well-pleasing unto God. 
In psalms and hymns let us praise the company of women, for they were well 
pleasing unto God. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Enroll Thy servants in the mansions of Thy 
righteous ones, О Lord, overlooking the offenses they committed in this life. 
Both now ..., Thou wast revealed to be she who hath delivered us from all the 
harm of the enemy, О Lady, entreating Christ, Who alone is compassionate. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Sacrificing themselves to our glorious God as a sacred whole-burnt offering 
and the first-fruits of human nature, the martyrs ever win salvation for us. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Grant a sojourn in heaven and generous gifts unto Thy faithful servants who 
have fallen asleep, О Lord, granting them deliverance from transgressions. 
Glory ..., О only Compassionate and Immortal One, Who alone art by nature 
the Bestower of life and the truly unfathomable Abyss of goodness: Grant Thy 
kingdom unto those who have fallen asleep. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Both now ..., О Sovereign Lady of the world, He Who was born from thee 
became the might, song and salvation of those who perished, delivering from the 
gates of Hades those who bless thee with faith. 
ODE VI 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Slain by the sea-monster of sin, * I cry unto Thee, О Christ: * Free 
me from corruption, * as Thou didst the prophet. 
Ye engulfed the noetic foe with the outpouring of your divine blood; and ye 
watered the hearts of the faithful, О passion-bearers. 
Having crucified yourselves to the world and the passions, О venerable ones, 
and ye holy hierarchs, ye have been deemed worthy of divine glory. 
As is meet, we bless the choir of the prophets and the assembly of honorable 
women, who contended well. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: With Thine elect give rest to the souls who have 
fallen asleep in times past, О God, overlooking their transgressions. 
Both now ..., О thou who hast given birth to Christ in the flesh, slay the 
passions of my flesh, О Virgin, and give life to my soul by thy mediation. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly merciful One. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Nailed to the Cross, Thou didst gather to Thee the choirs of the martyrs who 
emulated Thy suffering, О good One; wherefore, we beseech Thee: Grant rest 
unto those who have passed over to Thee. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
When in awesome manner and with ineffable glory Thou shalt come to judge 
the whole world, О Redeemer, be Thou well-pleased that thy faithful servants, 
whom Thou hast taken from the earth, may meet Thee in splendor on the clouds. 
Glory ..., О Master, Who art the wellspring of life, make Thy servants to dwell 
amid the nourishment of paradise, for with divine courage they have departed 
unto Thee in faith; and do Thou lead up those who were bound chains. . 
Both now ..., Having broken the commandment of God, we returned to the 
earth; but because of thee, О Virgin, we have been elevated from earth to the 
heavens, shaking off the corruption of death. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Hearkening to the hymnody of Thy venerable children * Thou didst 
bedew the burning furnace: * О Lord God of our fathers blessed art Thou! 
Let us honor with hymns the passion-bearers of Christ, who quenched the 
flame of cruel ungodliness with the showers of their blood. 
Having destroyed the winter of heresies, the right glorious hierarchs 
proceeded, rejoicing, to the springtime of God. 
By patience the ascetics inherited the rich grace of the Spirit and destroyed a 
multitude of demons. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: Grant, О Compassionate and greatly Merciful One, 
that those who have passed from this life may inherit the paradise of Thy 
sustenance. 
Both now ..., He Who showed thee to be a virgin even after giving birth, О 
pure one, saved the choirs of holy women who followed thee. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: An angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children, * but the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the tyrant 
to cry: * “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Delivered from the first crime by Thy blood, the martyrs, stained with their 
own blood, manifestly prefigured Thy sacrifice. Blessed art Thou, О God of our 
fathers! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Thou didst slay savage death, О life-creating Word. Accept those who have 
departed in faith, and who hymn Thee, О Christ, and say: O God of our fathers 
Blessed art Thou! 
Glory ..., О most divine Master, Who breathed Thy divine breath into me, and 
grant Thy kingdom unto those who have passed from this life, О Savior, that they 
may hymn Thee and say: O God of our fathers Blessed art Thou! 
Both now ..., Thou wast the most exalted of all created beings, О most 
immaculate one, having conceived Him Who broke down the gates of Hades and 
shattered its doors; wherefore, we, the faithful, hymn thee as the Mother of God. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Thy venerable Children in the furnace * likened to the cherubim * 
chanted the thrice-holy hymn * Bless ye, praise ye and supremely exalt ye 
the Lord throughout all ages. 
Wounded in their valor by threefold waves of torments, the divine martyrs, 
passing into profound peace by grace, attained unto the kingdom on high. 
The venerable and all-wise hierarchs, shining like the sun, enlighten the whole 
world with the rays of their teachings and the splendors of healings. 
О all ye glorious prophets and hierarchs, ye venerable and righteous ones, ye 
multitudes of martyrs and women: Preserve your whole flock unshaken by the 
demons. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: We hymn the righteous of ages past and the divinely 
eloquent prophets, and we cry out with compunction: By their prayers, О Word, 
grant rest unto those who have fallen asleep in faith. 
Both now ..., The choir of women loved thee as the full and nearby beauty of 
God, О Virgin, and in thine entourage they were brought before the Master of all, 
blessing thee together, О most pure one. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Mightily showing forth struggles, ye received crowns of victory, О martyrs and 
passion-bearers, crying out to Christ: We supremely exalt Thee, the Lord, 
throughout the ages! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
The faithful, who in a sacred manner have forsaken the things of this life and 
have meekly gone to Thee, the Master, do Thou receive, in that Thou art full of 
tender compassion, granting peace unto those who supremely exalt Thee, the 
Lord, throughout the ages. 
Glory ..., Be Thou well-pleased, О Savior, that all who have fallen asleep in the 
past may now dwell in the land of the meek, justifying by faith in Thee and by 
grace those who supremely exalt Thee, the Lord, throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Both now ..., We all call thee blessed, О exceedingly blessed one, for thou 
didst truly give birth to the good Word, Who became flesh for our sake. Him do 
we exalt supremely throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: О Virgin who received the angel’s salutation * and hast given birth 
to thine own Creator, * save those who magnify thee. 
Ye were brought to the Master as pure sheep, О passion-bearing martyrs. Him 
do ye entreat, that He save our souls. 
As shepherds ye tended the faithful in the fields of piety, О holy hierarchs, and 
now dwell in the fold of God. 
Let us bless the choirs of the venerable with the holy hierarchs and prophets, 
and the women who suffered mightily. 
Glory ..., For the reposed: О greatly Merciful One, grant that the departed may 
receive the eternal gladness of which the councils of the saints partake. 
Both now ..., О Virgin who hast given birth to the Light, enlighten my soul, 
driving away the darkness of my slothfulness and sin. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders of 
angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the Word 
Incarnate become a man * and with the heavenly hosts, * Him we magnify 
and thee we call blessed. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Hope strengthened the choirs of the martyrs, and enkindled thereby they took 
wing to the love of Thee, thereby depicting beforehand the truly unshakable rest 
which is to come, which do Thou grant unto the faithful departed, О good One. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Be Thou well-pleased, О Christ, that those who have departed in faith may 
receive Thy radiant and divine effulgence, granting them rest in the bosom of 
Abraham, and granting them everlasting blessedness, in that Thou alone art 
merciful. 
Glory ..., As Thou art good and full of tender compassion by nature, the Willer 
of mercies and the Abyss of compassion, those of this place of affliction and the 
shadow of death hast Thou taken away. Cause them to dwell where Thy light 
shineth, О Savior. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Both now ..., О pure one, we know thee to be the holy tabernacle, the ark, the 
tablets, the law and grace; in that for thy sake remission hath been given to those 
who have been justified by the blood of Him Who became incarnate from thy 
womb, О all-immaculate one. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
On the Praises, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone V: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the martyrs: At the commemoration of Thy saints, O Lord, all creation 
celebrateth; the heavens rejoice with the angels, and the earth with all mankind 
keepeth festival. By their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
O Lord, if we had not had Thy saints as intercessors, and Thy goodness being 
merciful to us, how should we have dared, O Savior, to hymn Thee, Whom angels 
do unceasingly glorify? O Thou that knowest the hearts of men, spare our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
The memorial of the martyrs is a joy to those who fear the Lord. For having 
suffered for Christ’s sake, they received from Him crowns of victory; and now 
they intercede with boldness on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Our God hath made wondrous His chosen saints. Rejoice and be glad, all ye 
His servants, for crowns and His kingdom have been prepared for you! We 
beseech you: Forget us not! 
 For the reposed: Of old, the eating of the tree in Eden sickened Adam when 
the serpent spewed forth its venom; for from this universal death hath arisen, 
devouring man. But the Master came, and cast down the serpent, granting us 
resurrection. Unto Him, therefore, let us now cry aloud: Have pity on those 
whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, О Savior, and, as Thou art the Lover of 
mankind, grant them rest with the saints. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Theotokion: We have come to know God Who was incarnate of thee, O 
Virgin Theotokos. Him do thou entreat that our souls be saved.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the departed, in Tone VI:  
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
О greatly merciful Master, Who hast unapproachable loving-kindness for us 
and an inexhaustible well-spring of divine goodness. Grant rest in the land of the 
living to those who have departed unto Thee, that they forever abide in Thy 
dwelling-place, which they so longed so for. For Thou, O Christ, hast shed Thy 
blood for all, and hast redeemed the world with Thy life. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. 
Thou didst willingly endure a life-creating death; pouring forth life upon the 
faithful, and granting them eternal joy. Do Thou establish in this joy those who 
have fallen asleep in the hope of the Resurrection, and in Thy mercy forgive them 
all their offences, for Thou alone art sinless, Thou alone art good and the Lover 
of mankind, that Thy Name, O Christ, may be hymned by all, and that we may 
glorify Thy salvific love for mankind. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Knowing Thee to be, in Thy divine power, the Lord of the living and Master 
of the dead, О Christ, we pray Thee: With Thy chosen ones, О Lover of mankind, 
grant rest unto Thy faithful servants who have departed unto Thee, our 
Benefactor, in a place of comfort, amid the splendors of the saints; for Thou art 
He Who willest mercy, and as God savest those whom Thou didst create 
according to Thine image, О only greatly Merciful One. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou wast shown to be a receptacle of divine majesty, О most pure one, for 
thou didst contain God and gave birth unto Christ in two natures but a single 
Hypostasis, О Mother who knewest not wedlock. О pure one, entreat thine only-
begotten and firstborn Child, Who preserved thee an unblemished virgin even 
though thou hast given birth, that He grant rest amid light and incorrupt 
blessedness unto those who have fallen asleep in the Faith. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE VI 
AT THE LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VI: 
Remember me, О God my Savior, when Thou shalt come in Thy kingdom, 
and save me, in that Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Undaunted by fire, the sword, or the savage onslaught of wild beasts, О 
glorious passion-bearers, ye have been deemed worthy of life everlasting. 
О Lover of mankind, and Who hast glorified the prophets and teachers, the 
venerable and the righteous, by their supplications save Thou our souls 
For the reposed: Those who in faith have departed from temporal things do 
Thou number with all the saints and righteous, О Word, that we may glorify Thee. 
Glory ..., Triadicon: We glorify the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, saying: 
О Holy Trinity, save Thou our souls! 
Both now ..., Thou hast been revealed to be blessed among all generations; for 
in truth thou didst ineffably give birth to our blessed God, О most pure one. 
 
On Saturday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, * O ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
And for the Departed, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
 Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 
 Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  

--- PAGE 19 ---
Another, for the departed: 
Communion Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to 
Thyself, O Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
 
 
