--- PAGE 1 ---
TONE SEVEN 
ON SATURDAY EVENING 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera: 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VII: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
O Come, let us rejoice in the Lord * who hath destroyed the dominion of 
death * and enlightened the race of mankind, * as we cry aloud with the bodiless 
powers: ** “Our Creator and Savior, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
O Come, let us rejoice in the Lord * who hath destroyed the dominion of 
death * and enlightened the race of mankind, * as we cry aloud with the bodiless 
powers: ** “Our Creator and Savior, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Thou didst endure the Cross and burial * for our sake, O Christ, * but as God 
by Thy death Thou hast slain death; * wherefore we worship Thy Resurrection on 
the third day. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
The apostles were struck with amazement when they saw the Creator’s arising 
* and they cried aloud the angelic hymn of praise: * “This is the glory of the 
Church, this is the wealth of the kingdom. ** O Lord, who hath suffered for us, 
glory be to Thee!” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII: 
Truly fearful and ineffable is the mystery * that hath been wrought in thee, O 
most pure one; * for surpassing nature and telling Thou hast given birth to the 
Word, the cause of all things, * Who became incarnate by the Holy Spirit, * taking 
flesh from thee, while preserving His own nature unchanged. * For when both 
natures had come together self-subsistent in a single Hypostasis, * He came forth 
dual in nature, wholly God and wholly man, * displaying the fullness of both 
natures. * For having endured the Passion in the flesh on the Cross, * He 
remained impassible in his divinity; * and having reposed as a man He returned to 
life on the third day as God, * destroying the dominion of death and redeeming 
the race of mankind from corruption. * O Mother of God, beseech Him as the 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Redeemer and Savior of our race ** to send down upon us the great mercy of His 
compassion. 
Then “O Joyous Light ...,”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,”:  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VII:  
Thou didst arise from the tomb, * O Savior of the world, * and with Thy flesh 
* Thou hast raised mankind. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation. 
O Virgin, Thou hast become the dayspring of the spiritual Sun, * that came 
upon the sunset of our nature; * but as thou hast boldness, * all-praised Mother of 
God, ** beseech Him to redeem our souls from our countless offences. 
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget 
thine own people and thy father’s house. 
Like the rod from Jesse’s root, * thou hast been revealed, O Virgin, * as 
budding forth with Him, Who wholly uprooted the weeds of deception, * as thou 
hast boldness towards Him, pray thou ceaselessly, O all-praised one, * to root out 
the passions of my heart, ** and to plant in it the fear of Him and save me. 
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance. 
O gate of God most holy, deliver me from the gates of Hades * and show me 
also the way of repentance, * by which I may find the gate that leads unto life. * O 
guide of those who have gone astray, ** watch over the race of thy faithful people 
and save our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
From thee, all-holy Virgin Theotokos, * Christ our God wast born, * He Who 
is truly God before the ages, became a man; * Though God omniscient, He hath 
appeared as man for our sakes. * For in Himself He preserveth the properties of 
each nature, * causing the one to shine forth with wonders, and confirming the 
other by sufferings, * wherefore He dieth as a man and riseth as God. * Implore 
Him, O pure one who knewest not wedlock, ** that our souls may be saved. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Thou didst destroy death by Thy Cross, * Thou didst open paradise to the 
thief. * Thou didst change the lamentation of the myrrh-bearers, * and Thou didst 
command Thine apostles to proclaim * that Thou didst arise, O Christ God, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
And the Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the 
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank. 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VII: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
O Come, let us rejoice in the Lord * who hath destroyed the dominion of 
death * and enlightened the race of mankind, * as we cry aloud with the bodiless 
powers: ** “Our Creator and Savior, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Thou didst endure the Cross and burial * for our sake, O Christ, * but as God 
by Thy death Thou hast slain death; * wherefore we worship Thy Resurrection on 
the third day. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
The apostles were struck with amazement when they saw the Creator’s arising 
* and they cried aloud the angelic hymn of praise: * “This is the glory of the 
Church, this is the wealth of the kingdom. ** O Lord, who hath suffered for us, 
glory be to Thee!” 
Other Stichera by Anatolius:  
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Though Thou wast seized by lawless men, O Christ, * yet Thou art my God, 
and I am not ashamed; * Thy back was scourged, but I do not deny Thee; * Thou 
wast nailed to a Cross, but I do not hide from Thee. * I make my boast in Thine 
arising; * for Thy death is my life. ** All-powerful Lord who lovest mankind, glory 
be to Thee! 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Fulfilling David’s prophecy Christ revealed His majesty * to His disciples in 
Zion, * showing that He was praised and ever glorified with the Father and the 
Holy Spirit; * at first without flesh as the Word, * afterwards for our sake 
incarnate and put to death as a man, * and risen with authority ** as the Lover of 
mankind. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
By willingly descending into Hades O Christ, * Thou didst despoil death, * and 
by arising on the third day as God and Lord, * Thou didst raise together with 
Thyself from the bonds and corruption of Hades, * those who cried aloud: “Glory 
to Thine all-powerful Resurrection. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee!” 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Thou wast laid in a tomb, O Lord, as One who sleepeth * and Who hast arisen 
on the third day as One mighty in strength, * raising with Thyself Adam from the 
corruption of death, ** as One All-powerful. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion Dogmatic: 
Thou hast been known to have become a mother * in a manner surpassing 
nature O Theotokos, * and hast remained a virgin in a manner beyond all telling 
and understanding; * no tongue can expound the wonder of thy birthgiving. * For 
while thy conceiving O pure one, was most glorious, * the manner of thy 
birthgiving transcends comprehension; * for where God so willeth, the order of 
nature is overthrown. * Wherefore, we all, knowing thee to be the Mother of 
God, * do earnestly entreat thee: ** Pray thou that our souls be saved!  
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VII: 
Thou didst arise from the tomb, O Savior of the world, * and with Thy flesh 
Thou hast raised mankind. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Come, let us worship Him Who hath arisen from the dead * and enlightened 
all things; * for He hath delivered us from the tyranny of Hades * through His 
Resurrection on the third day, * granting us life and great mercy. 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
Having descended into Hades O Christ, Thou hast despoiled death, * and by 
rising on the third day, Thou hast raised us also together with Thyself, * wherefore 
we glorify Thine all-powerful arising. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days. 
Fearful didst Thou appear, O Lord, as Thou lay in the tomb as One sleeping; * 
and having arisen on the third day as All-powerful * Thou hast raised Adam 
together with Thyself, who cried aloud: ** “Glory to Thy Resurrection, O only 
Lover of mankind.” 
 Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Having recourse unto thy protection, O Lady, * all we born of earth cry aloud 
to thee: * O Theotokos, our hope, deliver us * from our countless transgressions, 
** and save thou our souls. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, Full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, ** 
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...,” 
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast 
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O 
Theotokos and Virgin ...,” (Twice), and the Troparion of the feast (Once). 
And the Dismissal. 
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once): 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Thou didst destroy death by Thy Cross, * Thou didst open paradise to the 
thief. * Thou didst change the lamentation of the myrrh-bearers, * and Thou didst 
command Thine apostles to proclaim * that Thou didst arise, O Christ God, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone VII: 
As thou art the treasury of our resurrection, * O all-hymned one, * lead up 
from the pit and abyss of transgression * those who place their trust in thee, * for 
thou who hast given birth to our Salvation * hast saved those who are subject to 
sin. * Thou wast a virgin before giving birth, * and a virgin during child-bearing, 
** and thou didst remain a virgin ** even after birthgiving.  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SATURDAY NIGHT: TONE VII 
AT COMPLINE 
The priest saith: Blessed is our God..., and we respond: Amen. Glory to Thee, 
our God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King..., Trisagion through Our Father. Lord, 
have mercy (12 times). Glory ..., Both now ..., O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice). 
Psalm 50 (Have mercy on me, O God...); Psalm 69 (O God, be attentive unto 
helping me ...,) and Psalm 142 (O Lord, hear my prayer ...,) Then, Glory to God in 
the highest ..., and the Symbol of Faith (I believe in one God ...,) 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having crushed battles with His arm * and drowned the mounted 
captains * let us sing unto Him, as to our God and Redeemer, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
In song we offer unto thee as an adornment, gifts of thanksgiving and the 
divine hymn, “Rejoice now, O pure one!”, for thou hast given us joy in place of 
grief. 
We shall not remain silent concerning the grace of thy mercy and the might of 
thy protection, O most pure Virgin, for thou hast saved us from grievous 
misfortunes. 
Glory ..., Delivered from divers trials and tribulations by thy maternal prayers, 
O most pure one, together we all fervently chant to thee hymns of thanksgiving. 
Both now ..., Arrayed in the golden robes of the virtues and the grace of the 
Spirit, O most pure one, adorned as the Bride of the Father, thou wast truly 
shown to be the Mother of God. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens 
* by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing 
Spirit * hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
Let us earnestly offer cries of thanksgiving, honoring as our intercessor her 
who is the magnitude of divine joy and our gladness from the beginning. 
Delivered by thee from misfortunes, and having received joy because of thee, 
O Mother unwedded, we all glorify thee as a good bestower of gifts and a 
praiseworthy helper. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Receiving release from transgressions and temptations by thy divine 
prayer, O Mother of Christ God, with cries of thanksgiving we faithfully hymn 
thee as the source of good things. 
Both now ..., The Mother of Christ God is the wellspring of joy which ever 
poureth forth streams of immortality; and she herself saveth all, for she is for us 
the bestowal of life everlasting. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: The heavens hath been covered O Christ God * through Thy 
dispensation, * by virtue of Thine ineffable wisdom, * O Lover of mankind. 
In gladness we offer thee the fitting hymnody of joy, O pure Virgin, having 
been delivered from misfortunes by thy prayers. 
With the hands of our souls we thankfully raise hymnody unto thee, O pure 
Virgin, playing divine songs, having been delivered from great grief. 
Glory ..., The sinful passions have raised up many tribulations against us; but 
do thou deliver us by thy divine protection, O pure one. 
Both now ..., Truly blessed are those who honor thee, O most pure 
Theotokos, for through thee we have been delivered from sin and grief. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Night is bereft of light * for those without faith, O Christ, * but for 
the faithful there is enlightenment * in the sweetness of Thy words; * 
wherefore, I rise early unto Thee * and hymn Thy divinity. 
O Virgin, thou hast given birth to Christ, the Destroyer of sin, by Whom the 
world hath been saved from perils and pain; wherefore, we who have been 
delivered from grief cry aloud unto thee: Rejoice! 
Beset by divers perils, by grief and sorrow and adverse circumstances, O pure 
Lady, we who were bereft of gladness have found thee to be our hope. 
Glory ..., As the preservation of salvation for us, thy servants, O pure one, 
thou dispellest dangers, keeping us unharmed; wherefore, we who have shared in 
thy manifold good things give thanks to thee with hymns. 
Both now ..., Delivered by thee from many sins, from sickness and pain, and 
from grievous illness, O most pure Lady, we give thanks unto thee; for thou art 
the sure hope of thy faithful servants. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Having fallen into the abyss of sin, O good One, * like Jonah from 
the midst of the whale I cry unto Thee: * Lead my life up from corruption, 
* and save me, O Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Even the tongues of the angels are unable to fittingly sing thy praises, O pure 
one; but, acting now as servants, we offer thee the salutation of Gabriel. 
Having fallen into the abyss of grief and evil circumstances because of our 
sins, we are delivered by thee from want and danger, O pure Virgin Theotokos. 
Glory ..., O pure one, the whole world is under debt to thank, praise and 
glorify thy grace with piety; for through thee we have been delivered from 
misfortunes and griefs. 
Both now ..., Day and night, openly and secretly, we who glorify thee with 
faith flee beneath thy protection, O most pure Virgin. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
O Lord, we are Thy people and the sheep of Thy pasture. Like a Shepherd 
return us who have strayed, and gather us together who have been scattered by 
corruption. Have mercy upon Thy flock and take pity upon Thy people, through 
the prayers of the Theotokos, O Thou Who alone art sinless. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed the 
fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O Lord, 
the God of our fathers!  
We offer thee the joy of thanksgiving, O Mother of God, for, truly delivered 
by thee from every evil power, we cry out to thee together: Blessed art thou! 
We have come to dwell in the gloom of evening, in the tears of lamentation, in 
the expectation of evils; yet, deified by thy godly protection, O Virgin, we have 
found the joy of the morning: for thou hast saved us. 
Glory ..., Having acquired thy protection before God as a divine refuge amid 
perils, persecutions and sins, O most pure one, we all flee to thee, and through 
thee obtain release. 
Both now ..., With mouth and spirit we proclaim the grace of thy prayer, O 
pure and glorious one; for because of thee we are all delivered from danger and 
tempest, from grievous sorrows and the sin of the passions. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Him before whom the cherubim are in awe, * and the 
seraphim filled with wonder, * the Fashioner of the world: * O ye priests 
and servants and spirits of the righteous, * hymn ye, bless ye, and 
supremely exalt * throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
As one delivered by thy prayers from the tempest of sin, from passions and 
perils, O good Theotokos, with a voice of thanksgiving we cry aloud unto thee: 
Rejoice!; for through thee have we passed from grief to joy. 
O good one, disdain not those who are beset by sickness and danger; but, 
hearkening unto our poor supplication, free us from great sorrows, that we may 
hymn thine intercession with faith, O pure one. 
Glory ..., O thou who hast caused our transgressions to be wiped away, raise 
us up now from griefs and perils, from human passions and unseemly 
temptations; and by thy divine supplications, O Theotokos, most gloriously 
deliver us therefrom. 
Both now ..., Truly Thy compassions ever rain down upon everyone, O Christ, 
through the grace and entreaties of her who gave birth to Thee; for through Thee 
do we Christians receive Thy mercy, O merciful Savior. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify the Theotokos, * who in a 
manner transcending nature became a mother, * and is a virgin by nature, 
* she alone is blessed among women! 
Delivered from, divers temptations By thy prayers, O Theotokos, with the 
angel Gabriel we now offer unto thee joy and a cry of jubilation, as is meet. 
Joy and gladness and divine rejoicing have been multiplied upon us, O Virgin 
who knewest not a man; for, lo! we who sorely weep rejoice through thy prayers. 
Glory ..., With tongue and voice I shall offer unto thee a sacrifice of praise, O 
Virgin, and shall earnestly utter a hymn of thanksgiving unto thee that, praying to 
thee, I may be delivered by thee on the day of grief. 
Both now ..., We piously rejoice together in thy divine birthgiving, O most 
pure one; for thou hast poured forth joy upon us in the midst of perils and griefs. 
Wherefore, with thanksgiving we who faithfully praise thee chant hymnody unto 
thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT NOCTURNS 
The priest saith: “Blessed is our God ...,” and we say: Amen. Glory to Thee, 
our God, glory to Thee. O heavenly King ..., Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom ..., And we say: Amen. Lord, have mercy (12 
times), Glory..., Both now..., O come, let us worship (Thrice). Psalm 50 (Have 
mercy on me, O God...) 
And then, the Canon to the Holy & Life-creating Trinity, the acrostic whereof 
is “I praise Thee, O Trinity, Thou sole reigning Essence,” the composition of 
Metrophanes, in Tone VII: 
ODE I 
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 
Refrain: O most holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee! 
The noetic mouth of my heart and my material lips do Thou open that I may 
praise Thee, O only thrice-radiant God of all, and that I may chant hymnody of 
thanksgiving unto Thee, the Bestower of light. 
That Thou mightest show forth the abundance of Thy goodness, Thou didst 
create man, who is the mere image in clay of Thy ruling image, O Creator, Trinity 
infinite in power. 
O beginningless Mind, Who didst beget the coeternal Word and shine forth 
the equally-beginningless Spirit: Grant that we may worship the one God in three 
Hypostases, alike in essence. 
Theotokion: O Word of God, Thou didst appear to Moses in the bush as a 
purifying fire which in no wise consumed it, prefiguring Thine incarnation from 
the Virgin, whereby Thou didst refashion mankind. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens 
* by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing 
Spirit * hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
Hymning Thee, the one, thrice-radiant and all-accomplishing Master, O God 
infinite in power, we beg deliverance from sins and temptations. Disdain not 
those who with faith glorify Thy goodness. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
God the Word appeared from the Father as doth an offshoot from a 
beginningless root, and He is equal in might with the conjoined and divine Spirit; 
wherefore, O ye faithful, let us glorify the trinity of Hypostases, the one 
Dominion. 
O ye faithful, let us all glorify the one reigning Trinity, the Essence in three 
Hypostases, indivisibly and indistinguishably equal in glory and conjoined; and 
rendering worship, let us ask forgiveness offenses. 
Theotokion: O Word of God, having immutably taken on the likeness of man, 
Thou didst manifestly issue forth from the pure maiden, and didst show unto all 
the thrice-radiant Godhead of the immutable Hypostases one in essence. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) 
Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “He Who for my sake ...”: 
Have mercy on Thy servants who have sinned, O Holy Trinity; accept those 
who repent before Thee, O compassionate One, and grant unto them forgiveness. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Bless thou our souls, which are afflicted by sins, O all-pure Theotokos, and 
from transgressions deliver those who hymn thee, O Bride of God. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * 
and I have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
O sustaining and thrice-radiant Unity, divine and salvific for all, protect now 
those who hymn Thee, and save them from tribulation, sufferings and every 
affliction. 
Perplexed by the sayings which signify Thine unapproachable and thrice-
radiant divinity, we hymn Thee, O Lord Who lovest mankind, and glorify Thy 
power. 
With the incorporeal choirs in the heavens, we on earth distinguish between 
Thy Hypostases, O Unity and Trinity, and with love we glorify Thee as He Who 
alone hath dominion over all. 
Theotokion: Without leaving the glory of the Father, of Thine own will Thou 
didst condescend to assume our lowliness, becoming incarnate, O transcendent 
One; and Thou didst raise it up to divine glory, in that Thou art full of loving-
kindness. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: Night is bereft of light * for those without faith, O Christ, * but for 
the faithful there is enlightenment * in the sweetness of Thy words; * 
wherefore, I rise early unto Thee * and hymn Thy divinity. 
O Trinity of Hypostases, light-creating Essence, Unity in counsel, glory and 
worship: Establish us in Thy love. (Twice) 
Glorifying the Mind, the Word and the Spirit, the divine, three-sunned 
Essence, we beg deliverance from temptations and all tribulations. 
Theotokion: Taking form in human nature through the holy Virgin, O Word 
of God, Thou didst teach all to hymn the Trinity in Unity, sharing the same form 
and co-enthroned. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship I 
have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the deadly 
abyss. 
We glorify the Dominion one in glory, the sole reigning Godhead in three 
Hypostases which are immutably joined One with Another, distinguished only as 
to the origin of Each. (Twice) 
The noetic ranks of the beauties of the angels praise Thee, O three-sunned 
Godhead; and with mouths of clay we also faithfully hymn and glorify Thee as the 
one Creator of all. 
Theotokion: At the strange words of the archangel the Word Who was 
begotten before the ages as another Sun, of the Father Who is the Sun, shone 
forth from the Virgin in the latter times, and preached the incomprehensible God 
Who is One in three Hypostases. 
Lord, have mercy! (Thrice) 
Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Brighter than fire ...”: 
O consubstantial Trinity, Unity of all in three Hypostases, have mercy upon 
those Whom Thou hast created, O immortal One, burning up the evils of 
transgressors and enlightening the hearts of those who sing to Thy loving-
kindness: O our God, glory be to Thee! 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
More brilliant than light is the mercy of thy grace, O Lady, burning up the sins 
of all and bedewing the thoughts of those who praise thy mighty works, O most 
immaculate Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed the 
fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O Lord, 
the God of our fathers!  
O Thrice-radiant God, unapproachable and transcendent Unity, ever shining 
with the splendors of rays of light, save those who piously believe on Thee and 
worship Thee, O Master. 
Following the sayings of the divine prophets, Thee only, the one God of all in 
three Hypostases, do we glorify, crying out thus: Blessed art Thou, O Lord God 
of our fathers! 
With lips of dust, O Holy Trinity, we, together with the immaterial ranks, 
hymn Thee with songs crying out to the Unity of Essence: Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: That He Who fashioned Adam might fashion him anew, He 
clearly became incarnate from thee, O all-pure one, deifying mankind, which 
crieth out thus: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O most pure one! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow of 
speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for God 
showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be unvanquished 
by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages. 
Grant that those who hymn Thee may be enlightened with the illumining rays 
of the thrice-radiant Sun, and may now behold Thy beauty, O Trinity and Unity. 
And grant this ever, as far as is possible, unto all who with fitting faith hymn Thy 
greatness throughout all ages. 
Thou dost hold all things, O beginningless Dominion in Trinity and Unity, 
and dost direct heaven and the earth. Wherefore, keep me ever drawn by Thy 
love, that I may chant unto Thee: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Make me a temple of Thy thrice-radiant effulgence, O Benefactor and Lover 
of mankind, and show me to be immune to communion and fellowship with the 
invisible foe and the carnal passions, O my God, sole Ruler and Lord of glory, 
that I may hymn Thee throughout all ages. 
Theotokion: The divine Light Who shone forth from thy womb, O most pure 
Mother of God, hath illumined the whole world with the light of the threefold 
Sun, and shown the earth to be another heaven, which singeth: Hymn the Lord, 
all ye works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Mother of God and Virgin, * thou hast given birth and yet 
remained a virgin, * not in accordance with nature, * but by the 
condescension of God; * wherefore, we ever magnify thee, * who alone 
wast deemed worthy * of the wonders of God.  
We who are clay are unable to worthily hymn Thee with exalted speech, 
Whom the seraphim unceasingly hymn in the highest; yet we dare to magnify 
Thee as the Master of all Who art full of love for mankind. 
Deliver those who hymn Thee from illness of body and the passions of the 
soul, O Trinity One and Indivisible; and grant that we may be preserved 
unharmed by all the trials of life. 
O Dominion equal in power, divine, thrice-radiant and omnipotent, immutable 
Beauty of essential goodness: Grant remission of transgressions unto Thy 
servants, and deliver us from temptations and sufferings. 
Theotokion: Receiving mind and soul and fleshly substance from thy most 
pure womb, O Theotokos, God the Word truly became a man; and He manifestly 
showed mankind to share in the divine nature. 
Then, the hymn of Gregory the Sinaite:  
(which is chanted every Sunday after the canon) 
It is truly meet to glorify Thee, the Word of God, before Whom the cherubim 
tremble and quake, and Whom the hosts of heaven glorify. And with fear we 
glorify Christ, the Bestower of life, Who rose from the tomb on the third day. 
With divine songs let us all in godly manner hymn the Father, the Son and the 
Spirit divine, the Might in three Hypostases, the one Kingship and Dominion. 
Whom all mortals hymn and the hosts of heaven glorify, the essential Unity in 
three Hypostases, Who is worshipped with faith by all. 
We magnify Thee, the Godhead, the Lord of the cherubim, the incomparable 
divine Origin of the seraphim, the indivisible Trinity in Unity. 
I worship the beginningless God the Father, the Son Who is equally without 
beginning, and the Spirit. With hymns let us honor the one indivisible and unified 
Essence, the threefold Unity. 
Shine forth Thy dazzling lightning flashes upon me, O my God in three 
Hypostases, Thou Creator of all, and show me to be a splendid, luminous and 
immutable habitation of Thine unapproachable glory. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
With fear let us glorify Christ the Bestower of life, Who became ineffably 
incarnate of the Virgin, for the cherubim tremble and quake before Him, and the 
angelic armies glorify Him. 
The rest of Nocturns, and the Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT MATINS 
At “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Thou didst destroy death by Thy Cross, * Thou didst open paradise to the 
thief. * Thou didst change the lamentation of the myrrh-bearers, * and Thou didst 
command Thine apostles to proclaim * that Thou didst arise, O Christ God, * 
granting the world great mercy. (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Both now ..., The 
Theotokion, in Tone VII, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion): 
As thou art the treasury of our resurrection, * O all-hymned one, * lead up 
from the pit and abyss of transgression * those who place their trust in thee, * for 
thou who hast given birth to our Salvation * hast saved those who are subject to 
sin. * Thou wast a virgin before giving birth, * and a virgin during child-bearing, 
** and thou didst remain a virgin ** even after birthgiving.  
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VII: 
When Life was laying in the tomb * and a seal laid upon the stone, * the 
soldiers guarded Christ as a sleeping King * and the angels glorified Him as 
immortal God; * while the women cried aloud: ** “The Lord is risen, granting the 
world great mercy.” 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
By Thy burial for three days Thou didst despoil death, * and by Thy life-
bearing arising Thou didst raise corrupted mankind, O Christ Lord, ** as the 
Lover of mankind. Glory be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Virgin Theotokos * unceasingly entreat Christ our God, * who wast 
crucified for us * and arose again destroying the dominion of death, ** that He 
save our souls. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VII: 
While the grave was sealed, O Christ God, * Thou, the Life, didst shine forth 
from the tomb; * and while the doors were shut, Thou, the Resurrection of all, * 
didst appear unto Thy disciples, and through them renewed a right Spirit within 
us, ** according to Thy great mercy. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
Bringing sweet spices with their tears, * the women ran to the tomb, * and 
while the soldiers guarded Thee, the King of all, * they spake one to another: * 
“Who will roll away the stone for us? * The angel of great Counsel hath risen, 
trampling down death.” ** O All-powerful Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice Virgin Theotokos, full of grace, * haven and protection of the race of 
mankind, * for from Thee the Redeemer of the world hath taken flesh, * for thou 
alone art a Mother and Virgin, * ever blessed and exceedingly glorified; * intercede 
with Christ God ** to grant peace unto all the world. 
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses): 
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia, 
alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy 
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays, 
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon ...,”) 
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the 
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the 
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a great 
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos. 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself 
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said 
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; * 
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, 
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, 
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, 
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living 
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy 
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O 
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from 
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God 
and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany and: 
The Sessional Hymn: 
O Christ God, * who took upon Thyself our form * and endured the Cross in 
the body, * save me by Thy Resurrection, ** as Thou alone lovest mankind. 
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon: 
Having turned back the captivity of Zion from error, * quicken me also O 
Savior, ** and deliver me from slavery to the passions. 
He who soweth tribulations in the south with tears of fasting, * will reap with 
joy the sheaves of nourishment ** of eternal life. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit is the source of divine treasures, * from Him cometh 
wisdom, intelligence, and fear; ** and to Him belongeth praise, glory, honor and 
worship. 
2nd Antiphon: 
Unless the Lord buildeth the house of the soul, * in vain do we labor; ** for 
without Him no deed or word can be perfected. 
Of the fruit of the womb the saints, * moved by the Spirit, ** sprout forth the 
Father’s teachings of filial adoption. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit all things have their being; * in the presence of all He is 
God, * the Sovereign of the universe, * Light unapproachable, ** Life of all. 
3rd Antiphon: 
Those who fear the Lord and find the ways of life, * now and always are 
blessed ** with immortal glory. 
As thou beholdest thine offspring like shoots around thy table, * rejoice, and 
be glad, bringing them to Christ ** the Chief Shepherd of all. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit there be an abundance of grace, * riches of glory and a great 
depth of judgments; * for He is to be served * as identical in glory and honor ** 
with the Father and the Son. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hand be lifted 
high; * forget not Thy paupers to the end. 
The Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will tell of 
all Thy wonders. 
Let every breath ..., 
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath 
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * 
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, 
** and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” Then the Canons: 
Resurrection Canons Tone VII. 
ODE I 
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The tyranny of death was judged through a tree, O Lord, when Thou wast 
condemned to an unjust death; and so the prince of darkness having no power 
over Thee was rightfully cast out. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Hades drew nigh to Thee and in vain strove to crush Thy body with its teeth, 
breaking its jaws upon Thee; wherefore, O Savior, putting aside the pangs of 
death, Thou didst arise on the third day. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The sorrows of the foremother Eve have been done away with, 
for having escaped those sorrows, thou hast given birth without wedlock; and so 
knowing thee to be truly the Theotokos we all glorify thee. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
From His pierced side on the Cross the Savior hath poured forth two life-
bearing fountains from Himself unto us. Let us sing unto Him, for He hath been 
glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
By dwelling in a tomb and arising on the third day Christ hath granted mortals 
a pledge of incorruption. Let us hymn Him, for He hath been glorified. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Alone thou wast revealed a Virgin even after child-birth; for thou 
hast given birth to the Creator of the world in the flesh. Wherefore we all cry to 
thee, “Rejoice!” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Thou who hast brought forth the depths of divine compassion, O Virgin, 
illumine my soul with thine effulgent radiance, that I may worthily hymn the 
depths of thy wonders. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Seeing that we have been wounded by the arrow of sin, the Word, our 
Benefactor, hath taken pity on us. Wherefore the most divine One, ineffably 
united Himself to flesh from thee, O all-pure one. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The corrupt and mortal nature of mankind hath become subject to death, O 
Sovereign Lady. But having conceived Life, O most pure one, thou hast led it 
back from corruption to life. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens 
* by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing 
Spirit * hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Ascending the Tree, O compassionate Savior, and willingly suffering pangs for 
our sake, Thou didst endure Thy wounds, O cause of peace and through them 
bring the faithful to salvation, O merciful One, whereby we all have been 
reconciled to Thy Begetter. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
My soul having been wounded by the bite of the serpent, hath been cleansed 
of its wounds by Thee O Christ, Who hath revealed Thy light to me, who of old 
lay in darkness and corruption; for through the Cross Thou didst descend into 
Hades and hast raised me up together with Thyself. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: By the supplications of Thy Mother who knew not a man, bestow 
peace upon the world, O Savior; and grant victory over their adversaries to all 
Orthodox Christians, deeming them who glorify Thee, worthy of Thine ineffable 
glory. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou didst endure sufferings on the Cross and thus opened paradise to the 
thief, as Benefactor and God; establish my mind to do Thy will, O only Lover of 
mankind. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou didst arise from the tomb on the third day making life dawn forth upon 
all the world, as the giver of life and as God; do Thou establish my mind to do 
Thy will, O only Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Virgin-mother Mary, having conceived God without seed and 
delivered Eve from the curse, entreat God who became incarnate from Thee, to 
save thy flock. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The serpent crawling out of Eden hath enticed me with the desire to be 
Godlike and hurled me down to the earth, but He who is by nature compassionate 
and merciful, hath taken pity upon me, and having dwelt in thy womb, became 
like me O Virgin-Mother, making me divine. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, O Virgin Theotokos, the joy of all; for thou 
hast brought forth unto all the world the Wellspring of joy and gladness, Who 
scattereth the sorrow of sin, O Bride of God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Virgin Birthgiver of God, thou hast given birth to Peace for our sake, 
calming the ancient enmity between mankind and God his Father, and through 
faith granting us to know grace. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * 
and I have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The innocent Master, incarnate of the Virgin, having delivered His own back 
to the scourges of a fallen slave, and enduring maltreatment, hath thereby done 
away with the charges laid against me. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Standing before the judgment seat of lawless judges, He who as God 
fashioned mankind and justly judgeth the whole universe, is examined as a 
lawbreaker and struck by a hand of clay. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: As truly the Mother of God, implore thy Creator and Son to 
direct me, O all-immaculate one, to the saving haven of His glorious will. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Not knowing sin, and becoming what Thou wast not, O Lord, by assuming 
the form of what was another’s, Thou hast saved the world, for by luring the 
tyrant (to slay Thee) Thou hast thereby slain him. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou wast hung upon the Cross, O Lord, and, having done away with the sin 
of our forefather Adam, Thou hast filled our foremother Eve with joy; for Thou 
art come to save all of Thine anointed ones. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Born from a virgin, Thou didst suffer death, but granted life to 
Adam, who by His own will hath been led astray, for death trembled at thy 
strength, seeing Thee saving those who had suffered corruption. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou hast appeared before God to be above all creation, wholly chosen and 
fair, by the splendor of the light that doth pour forth from thee, wherefore we 
beseech thee to enlighten those who sing thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
From thy pure blood, O pure Virgin Mother, thou hast given birth to God in 
the flesh, Who hath redeemed us from our many sins, wherefore with love we 
glorify thee, hymning thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Rational nature, now initiated into the ineffable mystery of thy child-bearing, 
ministers as priest to the One who dawned from thee, O all-praised one. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Night is bereft of light * for those without faith, O Christ, * but for 
the faithful there is enlightenment * in the sweetness of Thy words; * 
wherefore, I rise early unto Thee * and hymn Thy divinity. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Thou art sold on behalf of Thy slaves, O Christ, and endurest blows, O Cause 
of freedom for those who sing to Thee. I rise to Thee at dawn and sing the praises 
of Thy divinity. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
By Thy divine power, O Christ, through the infirmity of the flesh Thou hast 
overpowered the strong one and through Thy Resurrection declared me a victor 
over death, O Savior. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: In a manner befitting God, O all-hymned Mother, thou hast 
given birth to God who become incarnate from thee, since thou hast not known 
union in wedlock, the conception was by the Holy Spirit.  
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou wast lifted upon Calvary, and numbered with the malefactors, the 
lights of the firmament hid themselves, the earth trembled, and the splendor of 
the temple was rent in twain, thereby revealing the apostasy of the Jews. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
With hymns we glorify Thee Who hath destroyed the entire dominion of the 
tyrant through the incomprehensible strength of Thy divinity and thus raised the 
dead by Thy Resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O all-praised Theotokos, Mother of the King and God, by thine 
intercessions send down the pardon offences, to those who with faith and love 
ever glorify thee in hymns. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
When Jacob saw the ladder reaching up to the heavens he fathomed an image 
of thy virginity; for through thee, O all-pure Sovereign Lady, God hath been 
united with mankind. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Having found eternal redemption through thee, O Virgin, we cry unto thee 
with fervor, “Rejoice, O Bride of God!” And rejoicing in thy light we praise thee 
in song, O all-hymned one. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
The Bridegroom found thee, O Virgin, as an only lily among the thorns, 
effulgent with the brightness of purity and the light of virginity, O all-immaculate 
one, wherefore He hath made thee His Bride. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship I 
have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the deadly 
abyss. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The souls of the righteous, who were held in bondage and forsaken in Hades, 
remembered Thee and prayed for salvation from Thee, which Thou didst grant 
unto them through Thy Cross, O Christ, when in Thy compassion Thou didst 
descend into the nether regions of the earth. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The choir of apostles despaired of ever gazing again upon Thy living temple 
not made with hands, which had been destroyed by the Passion, but praying 
beyond hope they were granted to proclaim everywhere that Thou art risen. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Who can explain the manner of thine ineffable child-bearing for 
our sake, O most immaculate Virgin, Bride of God? For God the Word, who is 
uncircumscribable, uniting with thee, became flesh from thee. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Willingly lifted up upon the Cross, O Savior, Thou didst take prisoner the 
dominion of the enemy. For upon it, O loving Lord, Thou hast nailed the record 
of our sins. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Having risen from the dead with authority, O Savior, Thou hast raised up 
together with Thyself the race of mankind, granting us life and incorruption, O 
Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Theotokos, cease not to entreat our God, to whom thou hast 
ineffably given birth, that those who hymn thee, O pure ever-Virgin, may be 
delivered from all dangers. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Prototypes in the law and the sayings of the prophets clearly foretold that 
thou, O most pure Virgin, would give birth to the Benefactor of all creation, Who 
hath in many and varied ways bestowed wondrous benefits upon those who with 
faith hymn thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Adam, the first-formed, was of old exiled from the delights of paradise by the 
wiles of the man-slayer, but thou, O Virgin who knew not wedlock, hast led him 
back again, by giving birth to Him who hath delivered us from transgression. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
He who by His divine will and creative power hath brought the universe into 
being from nothing hath come forth from thy womb, O most pure Virgin, shining 
with the effulgence of divine lightning upon all those in the shadow of death. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone VII: 
 No longer does the might of death * have power to keep mortals captive; * 
for Christ hath come down, smashing it and destroying its power. * Now that 
Hades is bound, the prophets with one voice joyously declare, * “The Savior hath 
appeared to those with faith. ** Come out O ye faithful, to adore the 
Resurrection!” 
Ikos: All that is beneath the earth, Hades and death, today doth tremble before 
one of the Trinity; the earth quaked, the gate-keepers of Hades, upon seeing Thee, 
trembled; all creation, rejoicing with the prophets, doth sing to Thee a song of 
victory, O our Redeemer and God. Thou hast destroyed the power of death, Let 
us therefore shout with joy and cry aloud unto Adam and his descendants, “Come 
out, O ye faithful, to the adoration of the Resurrection!” 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the Children were shown to be * bedewed in the fiery 
furnace, * chanting and praising the one God saying, * “supremely exalted 
and exceedingly glorified is the God of our fathers”. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Adam having by his own will committed disobedience was slain by a tree, but 
by Christ’s obedience he was renewed. Because for my sake the most glorious Son 
of God hath been crucified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou, O Christ, didst arise from the tomb, all creation sang Thy praises; 
for Thou hast blossomed forth with life; the resurrection of the dead unto those 
in Hades, and the most glorious light unto those lying in darkness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice!, O daughter of Adam, who hath fallen into corruption! 
Rejoice!, O only Bride of God! Rejoice!, for thou hast given birth to God the 
Word and through Him banished corruption! Entreat Him, O most pure Virgin 
that we all may be saved. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
On the Tree of the Cross Thou hast blunted the sting of sin, and by the lance 
in Thy side Thou hast abolished the record of Adam’s transgressions; Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou wast pierced in Thy side and with the sprinkling of Thy divine Blood 
Thou hast cleansed the earth which was polluted with the bloodshed of the folly 
of idolatry; Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Birthgiver of God, thou hast dawned forth upon world the 
illumination that existed before the sun, Christ, Who hath delivered us from 
darkness and illumined with the knowledge of God, all who cry: “Blessed art thou, 
O Lord, the God of our fathers.” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou O Virgin, doth possess like an adornment of many colors wrought in 
gold, love for thy Creator and Lord; the supremely exalted and exceedingly 
glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
When Isaiah of old received the coal and was cleansed, He saw in it the 
symbol of the birth of thine Offspring, O maiden, the supremely exalted and 
exceedingly glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
When the divine prophets of old saw the symbols of thy divine child-bearing 
they raised their voices in harmony O Virgin, praising thee and crying: “O 
supremely exalted and exceedingly glorified God of our fathers.” 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow of 
speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for God 
showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be unvanquished 
by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The most-pure spiritual Lamb, slaughtered for the sake of the world, brought 
to an end offerings made in accordance with the law, and as God Who alone is 
without transgression, purified the world which ever crieth aloud, “All ye works of 
the Lord, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The Creator assumed our flesh, which was not incorruptible before the 
Passion, but after His Passion and His rising was rendered inaccessible to 
corruption, and thus reneweth mortals as they cry, “All ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy total purity and lack of blemish, O Virgin, hath purified the 
inhabited world from all filth and pollution, and thou hast become, O most pure 
one, the means by which we have been reconciled with God. Wherefore, O 
Virgin, we bless and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Unto Him Who hath willingly endured the Passion and of His own will was 
nailed to a Cross, thereby abolishing the powers of Hades, hymn, O ye priests, 
and supremely exalt Him, O ye peoples, throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Unto Him Who hath abolished the dominion of death and arisen from the 
tomb in glory, saving mankind, hymn, O ye priests, and supremely exalt Him, O 
ye peoples, throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Theotokion: Unto the Word, Who is alone compassionate and pre-eternal, and 
Who became incarnate in the latter times from the Virgin, abolishing the ancient 
curse, hymn, O ye priests, and supremely exalt Him, O ye peoples, throughout all 
ages. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
By the splendor of thy child-bearing, O Birthgiver of God, thou hast 
wondrously enlightened all the inhabited world. For in thine arms thou didst carry 
the true God, Who hath rendered radiant the faithful who ever cry: “All ye works 
of the Lord, praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O pure Virgin, we devoutly sing the praises of thy womb, which ineffably 
contained our God in the flesh, Who hath bestowed the illumination of the 
knowledge of God upon all the faithful who ever cry: “All ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
With the brilliance of thy light, O pure Theotokos, thou who hast borne the 
light, rendered resplendent those who sing thy praises; for thou hast appeared as a 
tabernacle of light, enlightening those who ever cry: “All ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant: 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
And then the appointed Katavasia: 
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat: 
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable … 

--- PAGE 32 ---
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * 
as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh to 
the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, * 
thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Cease your babblings, all ye who with errant minds put forward the notion 
that the Godhead endured the Passion, for the Lord of glory, crucified in the 
flesh, could not be crucified in His divine nature, wherefore we magnify Him as 
one Hypostasis in two natures. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
All ye that do not believe the Resurrection of the flesh hasten now to the grave 
of Christ, and there learn that the flesh of the Giver of life was slain and arose 
again, in confirmation of the final resurrection, in which we have placed our hope. 
Refrain: We bless the Lord; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit 
Trinitarian: As we honor not a Trinity of deities but of Hypostases, not a Unity 
of persons but of the Godhead, we cut off those who divide It, and confound 
those who dare to confuse the true understanding of the Trinity, Whom we 
magnify. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
Light from light, the radiance of the Father’s glory, illumining agelessly, Christ 
hath shone forth for the life of mortal mankind lying in gloom, dispelling the 
persecuting darkness, wherefore we the faithful unceasingly magnify Him. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Let those who contemplate the sufferings of Christ in the flesh, and the 
strength of the Godhead in Christ, as accomplished in one compound nature, be 
confounded; for Christ died as a man, but rose again as the Creator of the 
universe. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: “Besides Thee I know no other God,” The holy Church crieth 
out to Thee O Word, “Who chose me as Thine own Bride from among the 
unbelieving nations.” by the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee grant salvation 
to the faithful, for thou art compassionate and lovest mankind. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Ever-virgin maiden, for our sake thou wast revealed to be the cause of eternal 
joy and gladness, having carried in thy womb the Redeemer, who delivereth those 
who in truth and by the inspiration of the divine Spirit honor Him as God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
David, Thy forefather, in a psalm names Thee the ark of divine holiness, O 
most pure one, who didst contain in a manner surpassing nature, God seated in 
the bosom of the Father, Whom without ceasing we the faithful magnify. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou art truly higher than all creation, O maiden; since for our sake thou hast 
given birth in the flesh to the Creator of all things; therefore, as Mother of the 
only Master, thou hast majestically brought about victory for us against all 
adversaries.  
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...,”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion (Svetilen). 
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to 
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the 
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion. 
On the Praises: “Let every breath ...,” 8 Stichera of the Resurrection, however, 
if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from the 
Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VII: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
Christ is risen from the dead, loosing the bonds of death; * O earth! proclaim 
the good tidings of great joy; ** and ye heavens praise the glory of God. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Having seen the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord Jesus, 
** the only sinless One. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
We cease not to worship the Holy Resurrection of Christ, * for He hath saved 
us from our iniquities, ** Holy is the Lord Jesus who hath shown us the 
Resurrection. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
What shall we render unto the Lord for all that He hath rendered unto us? * 
For our sake God dwelt among us; * for our corrupted nature the Word became 
flesh and dwelt within us; * unto the ungrateful He is the Benefactor; * unto 
prisoners He is the Liberator; * unto those in darkness He is the Sun of justice; * 
the path unto the Cross; * the Light unto Hades; Life unto death; * Resurrection 
for the fallen: * to Him we cry aloud: ** “Our God, glory be to Thee!” 
Others, by Anatolius: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
By Thy mighty power, O Lord, * Thou hast destroyed the gates of Hades and 
abolished the dominion of death; * raising with Thyself the dead who slept therein 
from eternity in darkness, * by Thy divine and glorious Resurrection, ** as King 
of the universe and as God All-powerful. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Come, let us rejoice in the Lord * and be glad in His Resurrection; * for He 
hath raised the dead with Himself * from the indestructible bonds of Hades, ** 
and as God hath bestowed upon the world eternal life and great mercy. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
A radiant angel sat on the stone of the grave that held Life, * and announced 
the good tidings to the myrrh-bearing women saying: * “The Lord is risen, as He 
foretold to you; * announce to His disciples that He goeth before you into Galilee; 
** while to the world He granteth eternal life and great mercy.” 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
O ye exceedingly wicked Jews, why did you reject the Cornerstone? * This is 
the stone which God hath placed in Zion, * God Who in the wilderness made 
water spring forth from the rock, * and for us poured forth immortality from His 
side; * this is the stone which was hewn from the virginal mountain, by the will of 
the Son of man, * who cometh again on the clouds of heaven * before the 
Ancient of days, as Daniel hath said, ** and His kingdom is everlasting. 
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel  
Note: If the service from the Menaion is “feasted” the Eothinon is taken from 
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve 
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise 
we cry: ** Blessed art Thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, 
glory be to Thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion. 
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose 
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by 
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 36 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
The fruit which slew me was beautiful and good to eat; but Christ is the Tree 
of life, and eating of Him I do not die, but cry out with the thief: Remember me, 
O Lord, in Thy kingdom! 
O compassionate One, Who wast lifted up upon the Cross, Thou hast erased 
the record of Adam’s ancient sin, and hast saved the whole human race from 
deception. Wherefore, we hymn Thee, O Lord and Benefactor. 
Thou didst nail our sins to Cross, O compassionate Christ, and by Thy death 
Thou didst slay death, O Thou who didst raise up the dead from among the dead. 
Wherefore, we worship Thy holy Resurrection. 
The serpent once poured its venom into the ears of Eve; but on the Tree of 
the Cross, Christ poured forth the sweetness of life upon the world. Wherefore, 
we cry out: Remember us, O Lord, in Thy kingdom! 
Thou wast laid in the tomb as one dead, O Christ, Thou Life of all; and Thou 
didst break down the gates of Hades; and having risen again in glory on the third 
day as One almighty, Thou hast illumined all. Glory to Thine arising! 
Having risen from the dead on the third day, the Lord bestowed His peace 
upon His disciples; and having blessed them, He sent them forth saying: Lead all 
into My kingdom! 
The Father is light; the Son and Word is light; and the Holy Spirit is light. Yet 
the Three are one Light, for they are one God in three Hypostases, One in nature 
and origin, indivisible, uncommingled and pre-eternal. 
Theotokion: For our sake thou didst give birth in the flesh to the Son and 
Word of the Father, as thou hast declared, O Theotokos. Wherefore, O Virgin 
Mother, we who are deified through thee cry out to thee: Rejoice, O hope of 
Christians! 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VII: 
Thou didst destroy death by Thy Cross, * Thou didst open paradise to the 
thief. * Thou didst change the lamentation of the myrrh-bearers, * and Thou didst 
command Thine apostles to proclaim * that Thou didst arise, O Christ God, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone VII: 
No longer does the might of death * have power to keep mortals captive; * for 
Christ hath come down, smashing it and destroying its power. * Now that Hades 
is bound, the prophets with one voice joyously declare, * “The Savior hath 
appeared to those with faith. ** Come out O ye faithful, to adore the 
Resurrection!” 

--- PAGE 37 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The Lord will give strength unto His 
people; * the Lord will bless His people with peace. 
The Verse: Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord the 
sons of rams. 
 
Alleluia, in Tone VII: It is good to give praise unto the Lord, and to chant 
unto Thy name, O Most High. 
The Verse: To proclaim in the morning Thy mercy, and Thy truth by night. 
  
