--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY EVENING: TONE VII  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today Judas keepeth vigil ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Lift up thine eyes, О my soul, and behold the dispensation and tender 
compassion of God: how having bowed down the heavens, He descended to the 
earth, that He might raise thee up from the wretched state of thy passions, and set 
thee upon the rock of faith. О the wonder of this awesome miracle! Glory to 
Thine abasement, О Lover of mankind! 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Behold thine exceedingly iniquitous works, О my soul, and marvel that the 
earth still beareth thee, that it hath not been driven asunder, that the wild beasts 
do not devour thee, that the ever-shining Sun hath not ceased to shine upon thee. 
Arise, repent, and cry out to the Lord: I have sinned against Thee, I have sinned! 
Have mercy on me! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Trusting in thee, О omnipotent Lord, we beseech Thee, that we be delivered 
from all tribulations, sufferings and turmoil; that we may pass our life in peace; 
and, having lived in purity, may find Thee, our Master, merciful on the day of 
judgment. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy incorporeal angels, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Illumined by the rays of the Trinity, О archangels, illumine those who hymn 
you with faith. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
О ye who are secondary luminaries through communion, who are shown to be 
perfect lights, we pray: Intercede for us before the primal Radiance. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Within the shelter of your wings preserve all the faithful from the spirits of 
wickedness, dispelling their darkness. 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With the angels let us all cry out to the Theotokos in hymns, for she gave birth 
to the Savior of the world, and remained a virgin even after giving birth, and by 
her birthgiving hath delivered the world from delusion. She who fed the Liberator 
of our souls hath given us inexhaustible sustenance. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of 
our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VII: 
I have come, О Compassionate One, like the prodigal son. As one of Thy 
hirelings do Thou accept me who fall down before Thee, О God, and have mercy 
on me, О Thou Who lovest mankind. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Like the one who fell among thieves and was wounded, so have I fallen 
through many sins, and my soul hath been wounded. To whom shall I who am 
guilty flee? To Thee alone, the Physician of men’s souls. О God, pour forth upon 
me Thy great mercy. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Glory to Thee, О Christ God, Thou boast of the apostles and 
joy of the martyrs, who preached the consubstantial Trinity! 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With the angel we cry out to thee, Rejoice! O Bride of God, * calling thee the 
bridal-chamber and portal, * the fiery throne and unquarried mountain, ** and 
bush unconsumed.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
ON SUNDAY NIGHT 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 
Of a truth the ranks of angels rightly honor thee, the Mother of the God of all, 
О most pure one. Accept now also this hymn of supplication from my lips of clay. 
О most pure one who hast given birth to true Life, slay my carnal wickedness, 
which liveth yet, and grant unto thy servant deliverance from transgressions and 
the passions, О pure one. 
Glory ..., The timeless Word, the Sun Who shone forth unapproachably from 
the Sun, hath shone forth in time, enlighten our souls, with His rays О Virgin, and 
grant us understanding. 
Both now ..., Ever effective words of praise are due thee, О Theotokos; yet we 
entreat thee, О pure one: From all the sorrows of life save those who have 
recourse unto thee. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens 
* by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing 
Spirit * hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
As a servant right wisely repaying my debts for thy grace, О Lady, I zealously 
hymn thee, О most pure Mother of the Word, the Redeemer of all; wherefore, 
even now rescue me from the assaults of life. 
О most pure Lady who hast given birth to the life-creating Word, thou hast 
clearly deemed Adam worthy of a higher life, upon whom death came through 
disobedience Free me now also from mortal sin. 
Glory ..., The law of the passions which hardens the flesh, and now vexes the 
spirit, causes my mind to grow attached to the most grievous of passions, О most 
pure one; yet By thy prayers quickly grant me the peace of dispassion. 
Both now ..., Having ineffably conceived in thy womb Christ, the Sustainer of 
all, О most pure one, thou hast freed human nature from the chains of Hades. Do 
thou now break asunder the tangled bonds which hold me in corruption. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * 
and I have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
My mind fraught with gloom, at night I do battle against a myriad of evil 
spirits. О portal of the light, with thy rays illumine me, and quickly rescue me 
from bitterness and grief. 
Surrounded by a multitude of sins and bound fast with bonds of temptations, 
I now call upon thine aid, О Lady, that I may be delivered from every torment. 
Glory ..., Drive away the hordes of evil and cruel demons and the assemblies 
of envious and wicked men, О all-hymned one, and deliver me from all the grief 
and tribulation of life. 
Both now ..., With the sword of thy prayers, О Lady, cut down the lying words 
and deeds which reverberate around me, and quickly free me and deliver me from 
all grief. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Night is bereft of light * for those without faith, О Christ, * but for 
the faithful there is enlightenment * in the sweetness of Thy words; * 
wherefore, I rise early unto Thee * and hymn Thy divinity. 
In that thou art the impregnable bulwark of the faithful and the protection of 
thy servant, О Virgin, from every violent grief and affliction deliver me. 
Assailed on every side, О most pure one, I am in great distress. By thy prayers 
restore the strength of body and soul which hath failed within me. 
Glory ..., I, thy servant, now flee to the depths of thy compassion, О Virgin, 
that I may be delivered from oppression and the unjust assemblies which assail 
me. 
Both now ..., The glory of thy supplications is everywhere supremely exalted, 
О most pure Virgin Mother; thereby deliver me now from every assault of life. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship I 
have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the deadly 
abyss. 
The utterances and words of all praise thee with faith, О pure one, for by thy 
birthgiving the debt of all mankind hath been clearly abolished; yet even now 
accept the supplications of those who hymn thee, and deliver us from temptations 
and griefs. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Sick am I, and pierced by the thorns of sinful passions, О most pure one, yet I 
seek healing from thee. Take from me all pain and sorrow, and deliver me from 
temptations and griefs. 
Glory ..., О Theotokos who didst become the palace of the King of glory, 
thou hast manifestly exalted human nature to heaven; wherefore, lead me up from 
the abyss of my many transgressions, temptations and passions. 
Both now ..., О pure Virgin, in a manner transcending understanding and all 
telling thou hast given birth to the incarnate Word Who hath delivered us from 
irrationality; wherefore, we unceasingly hymn thee with divine discourse, and 
glorify thee with faith. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
О Lady, thy Son hath been angered by thy sinful servants. We have turned to 
wrath Him Who is full of loving-kindness, but do thou turn Him again to mercy, 
О pure one. Have pity, О Mother of God, and with thine own supplications 
beseech the Compassionate One, and deliver those who are held captive. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed the 
fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O Lord, 
the God of our fathers!  
О most pure maiden who art arrayed in the vesture of purity, transport now 
my soul from vile wickedness to divine beauty, О blessed Lady, thou intercessor 
for our race. 
The demons of evil now exceedingly rage, and the fire of the passions burneth 
within me; yet with the rays of thy life, and all the more with thy compassions, do 
thou utterly consume them, О intercessor for our race. 
Glory ..., Entreating thy Son on our behalf, О most pure Mother of God, by 
thy supplications never cease to rescue thy servant from the griefs and 
misfortunes of humanity. 
Both now ..., The transcendent Son immutably took flesh from thee, О Virgin, 
and became a man, that He might save those who chant: Blessed is the Fruit of 
thy womb, О most pure one. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Bedewed, the children cried aloud * in the midst of the furnace: * 
Let creation bless Him Who formed all things by His word, * and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Expanses of the passions and many and varied woes truly surround thy 
servant, О Lady; but deliver me from their every temptation. 
Let thy mighty hand now come upon us, О Lady, and let it deliver us from the 
human tribulations we expect. 
Glory ..., Break thou the snares of wicked people of evil counsel, О pure 
Birthgiver of God, and deliver thy servant from every need. 
Both now ..., As thou art the only divine haven of the faithful, О pure Virgin, I 
entreat thee to deliver me from the bitter tempest of the sea of life. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Rejoice, О radiant Virgin, * Mother of the Bestower of light! * 
Rejoice, for thou didst contain the Infinite One within thy womb! * Rejoice, 
thou who art greater in honor than the very cherubim, * for thou hast given 
birth unto the Savior of our souls! 
Having bolted away from the commandments of the Master like a colt, let me 
be restrained by the bridle of thy prayers, О most pure one, that I may be brought 
back to the path of speedy restoration. 
I have been brought low by the commission of my wicked sins through 
mindless stumbling. Deliver me from my bitter state, О Theotokos. 
Glory ..., Having been shown to be the primal healing of human nature, thou 
didst cure the fall of Adam and Eve. Heal me also by thy prayers, О Theotokos. 
Both now ..., Grant me a chaste mind, a pure heart and prudent understanding, 
О Lady, that I may keep the most pure commandments of my God. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VII: 
Possessing the therapy of repentance, О my soul, draw nigh, falling down and 
with sighing cry out: О Physician of souls and bodies, Who lovest mankind, free 
me from my many offenses, and number me with the harlot, the thief and the 
publican. Grant me forgiveness of mine iniquities, О God, and save me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath, 
O Lord Who lovest mankind, Who washed away the denial of Peter with his 
tears, and forgave the publican’s offenses with his sighs: Have mercy upon me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou hast surpassed the hosts of heaven, * O blessed Theotokos, * for thou 
hast been shown to be a divine temple, * in that thou hast given birth unto Christ, 
** the Savior of our souls.  
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VII: 
I have not emulated the repentance of the publican or acquired the tears of 
the harlot; for in my blindness I am at a loss how to make any such amendment. 
But in Thy tender compassion, О Christ God, save me, in that Thou lovest 
mankind. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
I am tempest-tossed on the abyss of life, О Lord, and the waves of mine 
iniquities drown me. But stretch forth Thy hand as Thou didst to Peter, and save 
me, О Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel 
To the martyrs: Pray ye, О saints, that we be granted remission of our sins, 
and that we be delivered from the evils we expect and from bitter death, we pray. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O all-holy Virgin, * thou art greater in honor than the glorious cherubim. * For 
unable to endure the divine splendor, * while performing their ministry, * they veil 
their faces with their immaterial wings; * but with thine own eyes * hast thou 
gazed upon the Incarnate Word, * ceaselessly pray to Him on behalf of our souls. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “The Fruit of thy womb ...”: 
The tempest of divers passions and mine offenses causeth me to sink into the 
depths of despair; but through the supplications of Thine angels save me, as Thou 
didst the prodigal son, О greatly merciful Jesus. 
Prepare thyself in this thy life, О my soul, and have no doubt concerning the 
life to come; for then thou wilt have no-one to help thee, neither riches, power, 
friends nor princes. There will only be the disclosure of thy deeds, and God’s love 
for mankind. 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O undefiled Virgin Theotokos, * with the heavenly hosts beseech thy Son, * 
that forgiveness of transgressions be granted before the end ** unto us who 
faithfully glorify thee.  
ODE I 
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to His holy martyrs, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Let us chant unto God, * Who alone helped Moses * lead Israel out 
of Egypt, * for He hath been glorified.  
Having fallen into the abyss of evils, I cry unto Thee: Reach forth Thy hand 
unto me, О Compassionate One, and save me, as Thou didst Peter, О Lover of 
mankind. 
With a gesture of Thy mercy, О Christ, wash away the many offenses from me 
who repent, as Thou didst the harlot, that I may glorify Thee with faith. 
To the martyrs: О Christ Who made Thy saints luminous in the crucible of 
many and varied wounds, by their prayer deliver me from the darkness of the 
passions. 
To the martyrs: Purified by the endurance of wounds, the holy martyrs shone 
more brightly than the sun, and cast deception into darkness. 
Theotokion: О all-hymned Virgin, who art the intercessor of the faithful and 
the turning of the sinful toward God: Save me by thy prayers! 
Another canon, of the holy incorporeal angels, the acrostic whereof is “I offer the 
seventh praise to the incorporeal ones,”  
The composition of Theophanes, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: To God Who overthrew Pharaoh in the Red Sea * let us chant a 
hymn of victory, * for He hath been glorified.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Having illumined my mind with Thy light, О Christ infinite in power, inspire 
me to hymn Thine angels, in that Thou art omnipotent. (Twice) 
Possessed of the mighty radiance which originates with the wellspring of the 
Godhead, the choirs of heaven honor Christ with hymns. 
Theotokion: We, the faithful, know thee to be adorned with divine splendors, 
О pure One, and we all clearly cry out to thee: Rejoice! 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: My heart hath been established in the Lord; * my horn hath been 
exalted in my God; * my mouth hath been enlarged over the enemy; * and I 
am gladdened in Thy salvation.  
At night I have been beset by unseemly sins. Illumine me now with the light of 
repentance, О Bestower of light Who lovest mankind, that I may glorify Thee 
with love. 
All the paths I have followed in this life have brought me down into the 
crevasse of the passions. О Jesus, show unto me the divine paths of repentance! 
To the martyrs: Having finished your struggles with valor, О all-glorious 
martyrs, ye have been deemed worthy of crowns; and ye pray for all. 
To the martyrs: Having endured myriads of pangs, О passion-bearers, ye have 
been deemed worthy of myriads of good things, having joined the myriads of the 
incorporeal hosts. 
Theotokion: Having given birth to God, the King of heaven, О Virgin, cast 
down the sin which reigneth within me, and taking pity, save me. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The Church of Christ hath been confirmed by faith; * wherefore she 
crieth out unceasingly in hymns, chanting: * Holy art Thou, O Lord! * and 
my spirit doth hymn Thee!  
As mediators of the manifestation of the Divinity, О ye choirs of angels, ye 
unceasingly cry out immaterially: “Holy art Thou, О Lord!”, saving our souls. 
Emitting divine effulgence upon one another with love of the law, ye chant in 
goodly ranks unto Christ: Holy art Thou, О Lord, Who alone art greatly merciful! 
Let us piously emulate the life of the secondary luminaries of the primal 
Radiance, chanting unto Christ: “Holy art Thou, О Lord!”, saving our souls. 
Theotokion: The Word and Lover of mankind, Who by His will brought all 
things out of non-existence, in His tender compassion took flesh from thee, О 
Virgin, becoming a man 

--- PAGE 10 ---
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The heavens hath been covered О Christ God * through Thy 
dispensation, * by virtue of Thine ineffable wisdom, * O Lover of mankind. 
O compassionate Word, Who desirest that all should be saved, save me who 
have transgressed Thy precepts, and destroy me not. 
I have submitted to the irrational passions, О Compassionate One, and made 
myself like unto the beasts. О Word of God, taking pity save me. 
To the martyrs: Bound and burned with fire, ye utterly consumed delusion, 
aflame with the zeal of piety, О martyrs. 
To the martyrs: Ye were revealed to be a noetic paradise, О blessed ones, 
having in your midst the Tree of life: Christ, the Husbandman of all. 
Theotokion: О pure Virgin, full of the grace of God: Having filled my 
darkened mind with grace, free it utterly from ignorance. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: I heard report of Thee * and became filled with fear; * I understood 
Thy works * and became filled with awe, O Lord.  
О ye choirs of angels who stand before Christ as chosen ministers: Entreat 
Him to heal the wounds of my soul. 
The armies of incorporeal beings, standing with reverence round about Thy 
throne, О Master, clearly ever cry aloud: Glory to Thy power, О Lord! 
The ranks of angels were amazed, beholding Thee, О Christ, living on earth in 
the body, with mortal men. 
Theotokion: О all-hymned and most pure Mother of God, who ineffably hast 
given birth unto God: We beseech thee: Pray that we be saved. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Rising at dawn O Word unto Thy glory and praise, * we unceasingly 
hymn the image of Thy Cross, * which Thou hast bestowed upon us * as a 
weapon of assistance. 
I have wasted my life in slothfulness, and tremble before Thine inevitable 
tribunal, at which I, the passion fraught, must needs be judged. Have pity on me, 
О Lord! 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О Word Who enlightened the eyes of the blind, open Thou the eyes of my 
soul, which have been cruelly darkened, that I may behold the light of Thy 
precepts. 
To the martyrs: Confessing Christ with mighty thought, ye endured the 
wounds of every torment, О valiant spiritual athletes; wherefore, ye were blessed. 
To the martyrs: Navigating the threefold waves of all torments, ye reached the 
harbor of the kingdom on high, full of true serenity, О martyrs. 
Theotokion: God the Word, Who created all things by His will, became 
incarnate from thee in a manner transcending understanding, О Virgin; wherefore, 
entreat Him earnestly on behalf of all. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: I rise at dawn to Thee, * and I cry unto Thee O compassionate 
Lord: * do Thou illumine my soul, darkened by sins, * with the light of Thy 
commandments, and guide it!  
Illumined by the immaterial effulgences, with most sacred and eloquent 
mouths the seraphim hymn the beginningless and supremely divine Godhead. 
Not daring to gaze upon the divine Radiance, the cherubim, the manifestations 
of the wisdom of God, cover themselves with their sacred and abundantly 
luminous wings. 
Delighting noetically in the divine, exceedingly rich and beauteous effulgence, 
the glorious thrones are supra-naturally shown to be beholders of ineffable things. 
Theotokion: In thy most pure and all-holy womb the supremely divine Mind 
joined Himself to that which is human, О pure one, uniting Himself 
hypostatically, without commingling or change. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy 
on us!  
The abyss of transgressions hath encompassed me, and I have gone down into 
the depths of destruction. Lead me up, О Word, as once Thou didst raise up 
Jonah from corruption unto life. 
Threefold waves of evil thoughts bestorm me, but guide me to the harbor of 
true repentance, О Compassionate One, preserving my heart in tranquility. 
To the martyrs: Defended by your faith, О holy martyrs, ye rejected the false 
allurements of the tyrants, and were not wounded by the darts of the enemy. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
To the martyrs: Uplifted to God in love, ye hated worldly love, О martyrs, and 
were revealed to be friends of the Creator of all. 
Theotokion: We hymn thee, О all-hymned maiden who hast given birth unto 
the most holy Word, Whom all the hosts of heaven hymn with unceasing voices. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
The dominions are ever shown to be illumined like the youths with the 
effulgences of the Godhead, hymning His ineffable glory. (Twice) 
Gazing with love upon Him Who is omnipotent in power, the divine hosts 
manifestly remain mighty in strength. 
Theotokion: A descendant of the royal tribe, О Virgin, thou hast given birth in 
a manner transcending nature unto the Word, the King of all, and wast truly 
perfected as a virgin. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the burning furnace, O Savior, * and didst save 
the children who chanted, proclaiming: * Blessed art Thou throughout the 
ages, * O Lord God of our fathers!  
Make thou a sacrifice of praise unto God, О my soul. Hasten thou and repent 
while the commerce of life is still underway, that I may now purchase goodly gifts. 
The severance of death is nigh at hand, О my soul; bring forth worthy fruits, 
lest thou be cast into the fire of Gehenna like the barren tree, and wail 
inconsolably. 
To the martyrs: Having quenched the furnace of delusion with torrents of 
blood, the holy martyrs cried aloud like the children: О God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou! 
To the martyrs: Having mingled with the Light ye desired, О martyrs, ye 
became children of the Light. And ye enlighten all who are in darkness, dispelling 
the gloom of delusion. 
Theotokion: The bush which was unconsumed prefigured thee, О pure Virgin, 
for thou hast given birth unto the radiant Fire. Wherefore, I cry unto thee: Burn 
up my material passions! 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed the 
fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O Lord, 
the God of our fathers!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Manifestly surrounding Thy throne, О Christ, the choirs of heaven clearly 
send up glory noetically, crying aloud: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
(Twice) 
Immaterially revolving around Thee, the one Godhead, with zeal derived there 
from, the principalities cry out with unceasing magnifications: О God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Theotokion: О Birthgiver of God, without seed thou hast given birth to the 
one Christ, the God of our fathers: a single Hypostasis in two natures, Who 
executes His awesome dispensation. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow of 
speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for God 
showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be unvanquished 
by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages. 
I received the Word like a radiant lamp-stand, but, wretch that I am, I have 
inclined toward the irrational passions and ever walk in the darkness of evil. 
The Lord is nigh, as we believe. Take care, О my soul, and be not despondent. 
Be thou vigilant, and cry out in watchfulness: О Compassionate Lover of 
mankind, save me! 
To the martyrs: Having tasted of divine sweetness, ye endured the bitterness 
of pain, and now enjoy the divine communion of the Word, О martyrs. 
To the martyrs: Ye have entered into divine peace and received the good 
things ye hoped for, О all-praised martyrs; wherefore, we bless you as is meet. 
Theotokion: Humanity hath been freed from the curse by thy birthgiving; for 
thou hast given birth to the most blessed God Who adorneth all things with 
blessings. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom 
all the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O 
ye priests praise, and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages. 
Having set all your desire upon God, О archangels, ye ever delight in His 
radiance, entreat Christ, the King of all, that those who hymn you may be 
delivered from perils. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
As most honored intelligences free of all passionate material attachments, О 
angels, save all who with you lovingly exalt Christ throughout all ages. 
Theotokion: Having ineffably received the unapproachable Light within thy 
womb, О Virgin Theotokos, thou hast enlightened those in the darkness of life, 
that they may piously glorify Christ Who ineffably issued forth from thee. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: О ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify the Theotokos, * who in a 
manner transcending nature became a mother, * and is a virgin by nature, 
* she alone is blessed among women! 
Lo! the judgment approacheth, and possessed of condemnation for my deeds, 
I am cast into despondency. О Christ God, righteous Judge, condemn me not! 
Like the faithful Canaanite woman I cry to Thee: Have mercy upon me! And 
straighten me as Thou didst the cripple of old, that I may walk aright in Thy ways, 
О Lover of mankind. 
To the martyrs: Ye stripped away the garments of all evil, О spiritual athletes, 
and, clad in grievous torments, ye won for yourselves the vesture of glory. 
To the martyrs: The divine land of the living, the city of Sion on high, received 
you, the firstborn who are illumined by the beauties of your struggles, О spiritual 
athletes. 
Theotokion: With the enlightening rays of the Word Who shone forth from 
thee, О pure Virgin, illumine me who am covered with the darkness of sins and 
passions. 
Canon of the holy angels 
Irmos: O all-hymned one, * who art higher in eminence than the heavens: * 
having seedlessly conceived the beginningless Word * thou hast given birth 
to the incarnate God for all mankind. * Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
All the choirs of the angels, delighting in the radiance of the effulgence of the 
Godhead, unceasingly hymn our most glorious God, ever glorifying Him. (Twice) 
О cherubim and seraphim, powers, principalities, angels, archangels, 
authorities, thrones and dominions: Earnestly entreat Christ, that I be delivered 
from the besetting passions. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Theotokion: As a mother now possessed of boldness before thy Son, О all-
holy Theotokos, deliver those who hymn thee with love from grievous 
transgressions, ailments and tribulations, that we may all ever magnify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VII: 
Cut me not down, a sinner, like the barren fig-tree, О Savior, but grant that I 
may tarry for many years, watering my soul with tears of repentance, that I may 
bring thee the fruit of almsgiving. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
As Thou art the Sun of righteousness, enlighten the hearts of those who sing 
unto Thee: Glory to Thee, О Lord  
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Celebrating the memorial of Thy holy spiritual athletes, we chant unto Thee: 
Glory to Thee, О Lord! 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * grant peace to the life of us who cry 
unto Thee: ** O merciful Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
ON MONDAY MORNING  
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VII: 
Comely and good to taste was the fruit which brought death upon me. But 
Christ is the Tree of life, and eating thereof I die not, but cry out with the thief: 
Remember me in Thy kingdom, О Lord! 
Like the faithful Canaanite woman I cry out in the pain of my heart: Have 
mercy on me, О Savior, in that Thou art good; for ever tempest-tossed I have a 
soul beset by all the wiles of the enemy! 
The cherubim and seraphim, the thrones, principalities and powers, the 
archangels, the armies of angels, the dominions and most wise authorities, ever 
glorify Thee, О Lord our Benefactor. 
Uplifted unto God, the spiritual athletes utterly cast down the wicked uprisings 
of the enemy; and, revealed as victors, they now live amid joy in the heavens, 
resplendent in incorrupt glory. 
Glory ..., О indivisible Trinity, Unity in a single nature, Being in three 
Hypostases: With the hosts on high we worship Thee, О Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit: the one Godhead, the one Power, saying: There is but one God, the con- 
substantial Trinity! 
Both now ..., I have defiled myself with the pleasures of life, but have fled 
unto thee, the undefiled one, О Virgin. Deliver my most accursed soul from every 
lust and offense, that I may bless thee, the ever-blessed one. 
 
On Monday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: He maketh His angels spirits, * and His minis-
ters a flame of fire.  
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone V: Praise Him, all ye His angels; praise Him all ye His 
hosts.  
Verse: For He spake, and they came to be; He commanded, and they were 
created.  
 
Communion Verse: He maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame 
of fire.  
 
