--- PAGE 1 ---
ON MONDAY EVENING: TONE VII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Judas keepeth watch today ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
O most compassionate Master and God, by the judgments which Thou 
knowest grant that I may have the fear of Thee in my heart, that I may spurn the 
works of the evil one, love Thee with all my soul, and do Thy saving will; for 
Thou art our God, Who said: Ask, and ye shall receive. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
I have become a mockery for the demons and contemptible for men, 
lamentation for the righteous and weeping for the angels, polluting the air, the 
earth and the waters; for I have defiled my body and sullied my soul and mind 
with countless evil acts, and have become an enemy to God. Woe is me, О Lord! I 
have sinned, I have sinned against Thee! Forgive me! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
I pray Thee: Be Thou patient with me, who am devoid of fruits, О Master, and 
cut me not down like the barren tree with the axe of death, dispatching me to the 
fire; but be Thou entreated to make me fruitful, giving me time for repentance, in 
that Thou lovest mankind, that I may wash away my many sins, О Christ my 
Savior. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy forerunner, in Tone VII: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О Forerunner, who didst live a blameless life in the desert, restore thou my 
mind, which hath become barren through sins. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
We glorify thee, О prophet, understanding thee to be the swallow heralding 
the divine spring to those in the world. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
О divine Forerunner, intercessor for my life, protector of my soul: Deliver me, 
thy servant, from the false accusation of man. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Lady, to the right tranquil haven of salvation guide me who am tempest-
tossed amid the tumult of slothfulness. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst 
hearken unto me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VII: 
I have come, О Compassionate One, like the prodigal son. As one of Thy 
hirelings do Thou accept me who fall down before Thee, О God, and have mercy 
on me, О Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Like the one who fell among thieves and was wounded, so have I fallen 
through many sins, and my soul hath been wounded. To whom shall I who am 
guilty flee? If not to Thee alone, the Physician of our souls. О God, pour forth 
upon me Thy great mercy! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О holy martyrs, ye who have fought the good fight and 
received crowns: Entreat the Lord, that He have mercy upon our souls. 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, O Sovereign Lady, thou cloud of the noetic and ineffable Sun! * 
Rejoice, all-luminous lantern: Rejoice all-golden candle-stand. * Through thee, O 
most holy one, * hath Eve been delivered from the curse. * But as thou dost 
possess boldness before thy Son and God * Who is readily moved to compassion, 
* fail not to entreat Him by thy maternal supplication, ** O most pure one.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
MONDAY EVENING 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having crushed battles with His arm * and drowned the mounted 
captains * let us sing unto Him, as to our God and Redeemer, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
We entreat thee, О most pure one, the cause of our salvation and divine 
deliverance: Pray thou that we be saved. 
Wholly sunk am I in grievous temptations, in misfortunes and transgressions; 
and I cry to thee, О most pure one: Save me, thy servant! 
Glory ..., We beseech thee, the pure Virgin and the Mother of the Creator: 
Deliver us from all the oppression of the demons. 
Both now ..., О thou who hast ineffably given birth in the flesh to the Word, 
entreat Christ our God, the Author of life, that we be saved. 
ODE III 
Irmos: The Church of Christ hath been confirmed by faith; * wherefore she 
crieth out unceasingly in hymns, chanting: * Holy art Thou, O Lord! * and 
my spirit doth hymn Thee!  
Treading the path of most pernicious evil, I have not found the path of my 
salvation. Do thou guide me to it, О most immaculate Lady. 
Thee alone, О all-immaculate one, do I describe as my might and 
confirmation, my help and hope. Be thou a helper for me on the day of my 
departure. 
Glory ..., I ever beseech thee, О most immaculate one: At the hour of my 
death stand before me, and deliver thy servant from torment. 
Both now ..., Thou wast ineffably born from the Virgin, О Lord our Savior, 
and hast revealed Thyself as Thou didst will, restoring the world. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I heard report of Thee * and became filled with fear; * I understood 
Thy works * and became filled with awe, O Lord.  
Having violated the precepts of my Master, I have been revealed to be easy 
prey to mine enemies. Do thou deliver me, О Lady. 
At the hour of my death deliver me, О most pure one, and save my passion-
fraught soul from the demons. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Glory ..., О most pure Lady, break asunder the bonds of my transgressions, 
and by thy supplications be for me a mediator for everlasting life. 
Both now ..., We hymn thee who even after giving birth didst remain a virgin, 
О most pure one, and we glorify thee as the Mother of our God. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Rising at dawn O Word unto Thy glory and praise, * we unceasingly 
hymn the image of Thy Cross, * which Thou hast bestowed upon us * as a 
weapon of assistance. 
О good Virgin, thou haven amid the storm for those who are grievously 
troubled, thou portal of salvation for those who are saved by faith: Save me, thy 
servant! 
Richly show forth upon me, thy servant, thy many compassions, О Virgin 
Theotokos, delivering me from the dread judgment which is to come. 
Glory ..., The inconstant night of the passions besets my soul sending it into 
the pit of destruction. With the light of thy prayer, О Theotokos, save me, thy 
servant. 
Both now ..., О all-holy and joyous Virgin who ineffably hast given birth to the 
Word in time: Entreat Him to save our souls. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy 
on us!  
Thee do we have as a sure aid amid perils, our mighty salvation amid 
tribulations, a place of rest for us amid griefs, and our help amid misfortunes, О 
Ever-virgin. 
О most pure one, show thyself to be the preserver of my whole life: deliver me 
from the demons at the hour of my death, and grant me rest after my death. 
Glory ..., О Virgin Theotokos, thou art the beauty of the honorable and holy 
angels, and the joy of all mankind. Do thou guide me unto life. 
Both now ..., О most immaculate one, heal thou my wretched soul, which hath 
become incurably sick through the delusions of life and the closing of many 
doors. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
In the tender compassion of Thy mercy, О Christ God, Thou wast pleased to 
become incarnate from the holy Virgin. For her sake preserve our life, in that 
Thou lovest mankind. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the burning furnace, O Savior, * and didst save 
the children who chanted, proclaiming: * Blessed art Thou throughout the 
ages, * O Lord God of our fathers!  
Calling to mind the multitude of my transgressions, I am in despair, О most 
immaculate one. Wherefore, I cry unto thee: Help me, lest I perish utterly! 
Knowing thee to be the Mother of Life, О pure one, I cry to thee: Deliver me 
from the death of the soul, and grant unto me eternal life! 
Glory ..., О most immaculate one, from misfortunes and the passions, from 
pain and affliction, from the offenses of life and the unquenchable eternal fire do 
thou deliver those who faithfully honor thee with hymns. 
Both now ..., Every tongue doth glorify thee, О pure and all-hymned 
Theotokos, who art the glory and boast of our race and the guide of the lost. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Him before whom the cherubim are in awe, * and the 
seraphim filled with wonder, * the Fashioner of the world: * O ye priests 
and servants and spirits of the righteous, * hymn ye, bless ye, and 
supremely exalt * throughout the ages. 
I have wasted my whole life in slothfulness, utter wretch that I am; and am 
now cast into confusion and drawn nigh unto mine end. Help me, О Lady! 
Thou art the refuge of sinners and the setting aright of those who have been 
brought low, О Lady; wherefore, I flee to thy protection. Save me! 
Glory ..., As thy prayer never fails, О all-immaculate Sovereign Lady of the 
world, from the judgment which is to come deliver those who with faith venerate 
thine image. 
Both now ..., Every tongue which rendereth glory hymneth thee, О Virgin 
Bride of God, for thou hast given birth to the all-hymned God. Him do thou 
unceasingly entreat, that He save the souls of those who hymn thee. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: О ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify the Theotokos, * who in a 
manner transcending nature became a mother, * and is a virgin by nature, 
* she alone is blessed among women! 
Those who with faith flee beneath thy tender compassion are delivered from 
the sorrowful tribulations of life; wherefore, I also have fled to thy protection, О 
Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
О pure one, thou mighty helper, invincible bulwark against griefs, save me 
from sinful passions and from the everlasting fire. 
Glory ..., О pure Virgin, with the radiant effulgence of the Word Who shone 
forth from thee illumine me, save me, and rescue me from torments, in that thou 
art good. 
Both now ..., In thine arms thou dost carry Him Who sustaineth all things. 
Him do thou entreat, О pure one, that He save us who are beset by the malice of 
the alien one. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VII: 
Possessing the therapy of repentance, О my soul, draw nigh, falling down and 
with sighing saying: О Physician of souls and bodies, Who lovest mankind, free 
me from my many offenses, and number me with the harlot, the thief and the 
publican. Grant me forgiveness of mine iniquities, О God, and save me. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
O Lord and Lover of mankind, Who washed away the denial of Peter with his 
tears, and forgave the publican’s offenses with his sighs: Have mercy upon me! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, thou who didst contain within thy womb * Him Whom the heavens 
cannot contain! * Rejoice, thou preaching of the prophets * through whom 
Emmanuel hath shone forth! ** Rejoice, O Mother of Christ God!  
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VII: 
I have not emulated the repentance of the publican or acquired the tears of 
the harlot; for in my blindness I am at a loss how to make any such amendment. 
But in Thy tender compassion, О Christ God, save me, in that Thou lovest 
mankind. 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
О Savior, Who accepted the tears of the harlot and Peter, and justified the 
publican who sighed from the depths of his heart: Have pity on me who am in 
despair over my deeds, and save me! 
To the martyrs: Thy saints, who struggled on earth, trampled the enemy 
underfoot and set at naught the falsehood of idolatry, О Lord; wherefore, they 
received crowns from Thee, the God of mercy and Master, and the Lover of 
mankind, Who granteth the world great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou hast surpassed the hosts of heaven, * O blessed Theotokos, * for thou 
hast been shown to be a divine temple, * in that thou hast given birth unto Christ, 
** the Savior of our souls.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “The Fruit of thy womb ...”: 
I fall down before Thee in compunction like the harlot, О Lover of mankind, 
even though I am wholly at a loss for tears. Take pity on me as Thou didst on her, 
through the prayers of the Forerunner, О Merciful One, and save me. 
As Thou art good, О Lord and Savior, take pity, and wash away the defilement 
of my soul with the hyssop of Thy mercy; and having cleansed me of the 
defilement of the mire of the passions, have mercy on me, О Master. Save Thy 
creature by the supplications of Thy Forerunner, О Thou Who art greatly 
merciful! 
Glory..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou art the fervent intercessor and helper of Christians, О all-hymned 
Theotokos; wherefore, with the Forerunner entreat thy Son, that we may find 
mercy. 
ODE I 
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to His holy martyrs, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Having crushed battles with His arm * and drowned the mounted 
captains * let us sing unto Him, as to our God and Redeemer, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
I ever commit sins, and have no fear of Thee, О Christ, Who seekest my 
repentance with longsuffering. Grant me the intention to convert, and disdain me 
not, in that Thou art good. 
Wretch that I am, I never cease to heap up sins upon sins, О Christ, О only 
Good and Sinless One. Take pity and save me. 
To the martyrs: Boldly did the valiant spiritual athletes call to each other: This 
contest is full of struggles. Let us run, for Christ, the Judge of the contest standeth 
before us, crowning those who vanquish the enemy. 
To the martyrs: Ye put off the body through many and varied wounds, and 
clothed yourselves in the vesture of incorruption, О wise martyrs; and ye became 
children of the Father of compassions. 
Theotokion: О Virgin Birthgiver of God, heal thou my soul, which hath been 
afflicted by many sins, that with cries of thanksgiving I may ever earnestly glorify 
thee 
Another canon, of the holy prophet and forerunner, the composition of Joseph, in 
Tone VII: 
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The beauty of the Church, thou wast shown to be adorned, О blessed 
Forerunner. By thy prayers ever save it mighty and unshaken from every tempest 
of the heretics. 
Thou didst offer thyself to the Creator as a sacred, unblemished sacrifice, О 
divine Forerunner, and wast slaughtered like an innocent lamb. Wherefore, I pray 
thee with faith: Deliver me from all the malice of the enemy. 
Heal thou the diseases of our souls and bodies, О ever-glorious Forerunner, 
ever beseeching the Word, Who in His tender compassion hath taken away all 
infirmities and sicknesses. 
Theotokion: О all-holy one, thou hast given birth to the unapproachable Word 
Who shareth flesh with us hypostatically. Him do thou ever entreat, that He save 
all who ever bless thee with faith. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Having established the heavens * and made firm the foundation of 
the earth upon many waters: * establish Thou my mind in Thy will, * О 
Lover of mankind, 
O Christ, only Savior, Who overlooketh our sins in Thy great love for 
mankind, overlook my many evils, that I may glorify Thee, the supremely good 
One. 
I submit to the desires of my flesh, unconscionably ignoring Thy wishes, О 
Christ; and I fear the fiery retribution, О Word, do Thou deliver me from such. 
To the martyrs: While suffering bodily pangs, the spiritual athletes looked 
forward to a life of ease without pain; and having joyously received it, they ever 
ease the pains of the faithful. 
To the martyrs: With the rays of your struggles ye dispersed the cruel night of 
delusion, О passion-bearers, and have passed over to the unwaning Light, ever 
removing the darkness of our pangs. 
Theotokion: The prophet foresaw thee as the portal of God, through which 
He alone passed, as is known, О most pure Virgin. Wherefore, I pray thee: Do 
thou thyself open the doors of repentance unto me. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens 
* by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing 
Spirit * hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
With lightning-flashes of solar radiance dost thou illumine all creation; for 
thou wast shown to be a brilliant star of the noetic Sun, О Forerunner. Him do 
thou earnestly entreat, that He drive the darkness of the passions away from our 
pained hearts. 
Standing between the law and grace, О divine Forerunner, manifestly showing 
the cessation of the one and the pure dawning of the other unto all: the perfect 
restoration of those who have waxed old through sins. 
Baptist of Christ, we cry aloud: Deliver us from, the attacks of the demons, the 
temptations of life and all tribulation, entreating the supremely good One, that on 
the day of judgment we may be freed from torments. 
Theotokion: О blessed and pure Lady, who hast ineffably given birth unto 
God: With His divine Baptist unceasingly pray for us who fall into the perils of 
life and are beset by sins. 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Assured of Thy coming in the flesh, O Christ, * the prophet 
Habakkuk cried aloud: * Glory to Thy power O Lord. 
I have wandered from the path which leadeth me to life, and have fallen into 
the pit of evils. О Savior, disdain me not. 
Send down upon me streams of tears, О Master, Word of God, that I may 
wash away the mire of my many offenses. 
To the martyrs: Led like lambs to the slaughter, О martyrs, ye were deemed 
worthy of glory and slew the warlike enemy. 
To the martyrs: Thy streams of your blood which was shed prepared all to 
receive torrents of delight, О all-famed and divine martyrs. 
Theotokion: The Lord became incarnate from thy pure blood, granting 
repentance to all mankind through thy mediation, О maiden. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * 
and I have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having cast down the horde of the adversary and prevailed over them with 
brilliance, О Baptist, By thy prayers cast down sin which reigneth in me, I pray 
thee. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Revealed unto us to be a noetic lampstand, О blessed one, thou didst point 
out Jesus, the great Sun of righteousness. Pray thou that the hearts of all may be 
illumined by Him. 
Conceived and born in iniquities, I live in slothfulness, and fear the torments 
to come. Praying to God, rescue me from them, О Baptist.  
Bring to God supplications for us who honor thee, О Baptist, that He may 
deliver us from every grievous circumstance and from the harm wrought by the 
demons, we pray, 
Theotokion: In many images, the shadows of the law revealed thee who hast 
given birth unto God. Him do thou entreat, О all-immaculate one, that He deliver 
me from iniquity and the carnal passions. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: О Thou Who hast dispelled the night of the passions, * illumine me 
with the noetic light, * driving away the primordial darkness of the abyss, * 
and shining forth upon the world the first-formed light, * О Creator of all. 
When Thou shalt judge the earth, О Word, deliver me from Thy righteous 
wrath, and show me to be a temple of Thy goodness, cleansed of my many 
offenses through repentance, О only Creator of all. 
I have become blinded in mind by the evil gloom of the passions, and my 
heart hath become senseless, and I know not what I do. Turn me back to Thee, О 
Christ, and grant me the repentance which purifies from sin. 
To the martyrs: Having like youths run the race full of sweat, О spiritual 
athletes, ye attained unto splendor in heaven, receiving the honors of victory from 
the hand of the Bestower of life; wherefore, ye now rejoice. 
To the martyrs: With the mighty sinews of your sacred pangs ye truly choked 
the serpent, the author of evil, О spiritual athletes, and have been deemed worthy 
of the delight of paradise. Wherefore, we praise you. 
Theotokion: О thou who art the radiant cloud of the Sun, shine upon me the 
noetic light of true repentance, and dispel the darkness of wicked thoughts, that 
with faith I may hymn thee as the salvation of the faithful. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: Having risen at dawn out of the night, * I entreat Thee O Lord my 
God: * grant me the forgiveness of my sins, * and guide my steps to the 
light * of thy commandments, I pray Thee.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, О most wise one, thou didst cause 
thoughts of the acknowledgment of the God to spring forth; wherefore, I pray 
thee: Restore my soul which hath become a desert through all manner of 
transgressions. 
Thou wast shown to be the pure vessel of the Master, О divine prophet. By 
thy prayers deliver me from impure acts, and entreat the Benefactor, that I may 
receive everlasting honors. 
Iniquities have entered into me through the door of slothfulness. О blessed 
Forerunner, make me better through examples of repentance, that I may diligently 
tread the paths of the Lord. 
Theotokion: Mortify the earthly understanding of my flesh, О Theotokos who 
hast given birth unto Life, Who by death hath utterly destroyed death in His 
divine power, О pure and most holy one. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Having fallen into the abyss of sin, О good One, * like Jonah from 
the midst of the whale I cry unto Thee: * Lead my life up from corruption, 
* and save me, О Lover of mankind. 
I have been revealed to be a new prodigal, having lived vilely on earth, and 
capitulated before the assault of the passions; but turn me back, О Christ my 
God, and save me, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
Groan, О my soul, that thou mayest be delivered from groaning; shed tears, 
that in the next world thou mayest not taste of ceaseless tears and pain, which will 
be of no benefit. 
To the martyrs: Ye were revealed to be like stones manifestly set in the crown 
of the Church of Christ, and became its magnificent adornment, О honored great-
martyrs. 
To the martyrs: Having received worthy ends in God, О most wise ones, ye 
have inherited never-ending rewards. Wherefore, pray ye, О martyrs, that we may 
end our life in repentance. 
Theotokion: Lift me up out of the depths of the slothfulness of countless 
evils, О good one who hast given birth to the Abyss of loving-kindness, and grant 
me a wellspring of tears, О Ever-virgin. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy 
on us!  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Manifestly aglow with rays of the virtues, and shining with splendid 
martyrdom, thou dost illumine all creation, О close friend of the noetic 
Dayspring. 
Thou didst spring forth from a barren and elderly woman, О blessed one; 
wherefore, I cry out to thee: With the beauty of repentance and thy supplications 
renew me who have grown old through many sins. 
O divine prophet, lampstand of the never-waning Light, by thy prayers light 
the lamp of my heart, and cause me to share in the divine Light. 
Theotokion: The Word descended into thy womb like rain. Him do thou 
beseech, О most pure Virgin, that He dry up the flow of my countless evils, I pray 
thee. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: The fire in the furnace * neither touched nor disturbed Thy 
children, О Savior. * Then the three, as with a single mouth, * hymned and 
blessed Thee, saying; * Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
I have fallen into the passion of dishonor, О Savior, and have made myself 
like unto the beasts. And, darkened, I no longer see Thee waiting with great 
patience, О Word. Grant me time for repentance, and save me. 
I have reached the end of my life in slothfulness, doing what I ought not to 
do; and lo! Unaware I now approach the gates of Hades. Disdain me not, О 
Christ Who alone art good. 
To the martyrs: О most wise ones, ye died, desiring everlasting life for the 
world; and having utterly slain the enemy, ye took wing to the heavens, ever 
praying for us, О spiritual athletes. 
To the martyrs: Released from the demands of the body, О martyrs, ye broke 
asunder the bonds of delusion, and with mighty love bound men’s souls to Christ 
Who was bound by the flesh, and loosed us from the curse. 
Theotokion: The prophet foresaw thee as a new scroll whereon the Word of 
the Father was written; wherefore, I beseech thee, О pure one: Pray that I may be 
entered in the book of the living, erasing the record of my many evils. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: Of old the Children were shown to be * bedewed in the fiery 
furnace, * chanting and praising the one God saying: * 'Supremely exalted 
and exceedingly glorified is the God of our Fathers'. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
By thy prayers grant me showers of tears, О Forerunner who immersed the 
Abyss of tender compassion in the river’s streams, and wholly cleanse me of 
defilement of flesh and spirit. 
Offer prayer to our God, Who is over all, that, in that He is full of loving-
kindness, He have mercy upon me who have sinned and cannot recover. 
О barren soul, hasten thou to repent, lest the righteous judgment cut thee 
down at the root like the barren fig-tree; but cry unto the Master; О God, having 
cleansed me, save me! 
Theotokion: Possessed of a soul slain by evil crimes, I pray thee, О Lady who 
slew Hades by thy birthgiving: Enliven me with models of repentance. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Him Who is unceasingly glorified * by the angels in the highest, * O 
Ye heavens of heavens, earth and ye mountains, * ye hills and depths of the 
sea, * and all ye races of mankind, * bless ye with hymns as the Fashioner, 
* Redeemer, and God! 
Enjoying harmful pleasures in overabundance, I, the senseless one, have madly 
surpassed every other sinner. As Thou hast an infinite abundance of tender 
compassion, grant me cleansing of my transgressions. 
The Bridegroom is at the door! Light thy lamp, О my soul, filling it with the 
oil of loving-kindness and every good work. Before the door is closed, make haste 
to enter with Christ in ineffable joy. 
To the martyrs: Undaunted by tortures, the valiant spiritual athletes cried out: 
“Behold, now is the acceptable time! Let us all stand with steadfast mind, and with 
a little pain, let us acquire the life which is devoid of pain, and the sweetness 
which groweth not old!” 
To the martyrs: Ever irrigated with divine waters, О passion-bearers of the 
Savior, ye water the whole earth with the emulation of your struggles, forever 
rendering it fruitful in the virtues, for Christ. 
Theotokion: О Theotokos, renowned intercession and hope of Christians: On 
the dread day intercede for me, who have greatly transgressed, and deliver me 
from terrible Gehenna, numbering me among the sheep at the right hand of thy 
Son. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom 
all the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O 
ye priests praise, and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Cease thou never to entreat the only Redeemer, Who gave release to those 
who were bound and ever glorify thee, О prophet, that I, who have been bound, 
may be released from my many transgressions 
I have been wounded by the sword of pleasures, and cry out to thee in pain of 
heart: Heal thou the pangs of my soul, entreating Christ, the only Physician of 
souls and bodies. 
О Forerunner who baptized the Word with thine own hand, cease not to 
unceasingly entreat Him, that from the hand of sin He may deliver me who have 
sinned greatly and am brought low and condemned. 
Because I have foolishly buried in the earth the talant entrusted to me by God, 
I await bitter retribution. Rescue me from such by thy prayers, О Baptist, I 
beseech thee with faith. 
Theotokion: Thou didst remain unconsumed when thou didst take the 
unbearable Fire into thy womb, О Virgin. Wherefore, rescue me from the 
unquenchable fire, bedewing me now with most beauteous examples of true 
repentance. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Who from among mankind is able to describe * the seedless 
conception of thy birthgiving? * Who from among mortals will not marvel * 
at the birth of thine incorrupt Offspring? * Wherefore, we, the tribes of 
earth, * magnify thee, О Theotokos. 
That we may inherit the good things to come, let us weep, let us sigh, let us 
entreat Christ, О ye faithful, while we have time for repentance and prayer. 
Like the Canaanite woman I cry to Thee: Have mercy on me, О Christ, as of 
old Thou didst set aright the prostrate woman, О Jesus, and save me who am 
drowning in sins, as Thou didst Peter О Savior. 
To the martyrs: Afflicted by tribulations, imprisonment and torments, О 
martyred passion-bearers, ye passed over to the broad plain of consolation, and 
deliver us from oppression and transgressions. 
To the martyrs: While the earth hath now covered your bodies, heaven holdeth 
your holy souls; and standing ever before the throne of glory, they rejoice with the 
angels. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: The Lord Who clothed Himself in me issued forth from thee, О 
most pure one; wherefore, beseech Him to illumine me with a vesture of light, 
having now stripped from me the most grievous rags of the passions, О Virgin. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh to 
the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, * 
thee do we magnify. 
Thou didst spring forth from a sacred root, О prophet, wholly uprooting the 
roots of evil, whereby I am choked and have become useless. О blessed one, set 
me aright, that I may put forth the fruits of divine repentance. 
The Church knoweth thee to be a most comely swallow and nightingale, О 
great Forerunner; for thou didst sing the hymn of repentance to souls laid waste 
and grown hard through evils. Wherefore, we bless thee with faith. 
Unto all thou didst show the ways leading to the gates of salvation, О glorious 
Forerunner. Strengthen me to walk them, for I am drawn into all the trackless 
wastes of life and, beguiled, have committed evil. 
The awesome day is nigh at hand, and bearing deeds worthy of condemnation, 
I lament: Lord, О Lord, Who alone art merciful: through the prayers of Thy Fore-
runner and all the saints, show me then to be uncondemned. 
Theotokion: О thou who art full of grace, who hast given birth to the divine 
Light, illumine my soul, which hath been darkened by transgression, I pray, and 
show me to be free of everlasting darkness, that I may magnify and glorify thee, 
the ever-blessed one. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VII: 
Cut me not down, a sinner, like the barren fig-tree, О Savior, but grant that I 
may tarry for many years, watering my soul with tears of repentance, that I may 
bring thee the fruit of almsgiving. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
As Thou art the Sun of righteousness, enlighten the hearts of those who sing 
unto Thee: Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Rejoicing amid the tribunal of the violators of the law, Thy 
passion-bearers cried aloud: Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
From the Virgin Thou didst spring forth as light, О Christ, illumining the race 
of mankind. Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VII: 
Comely and good to taste was the fruit which brought death upon me. But 
Christ is the Tree of life, and eating thereof I die not, but cry out with the thief: 
Remember me in Thy kingdom, О Lord! 
Treat the incurable sores of my heart, O Lord, for Thou alone art the 
Physician of souls and bodies; and ever grant that I may tread aright the paths of 
salvation. 
О Baptist of Christ, who came before the Sun of righteousness, with thy 
divine supplications light thou the lamp of my soul, which hath been extinguished 
by my great evil, that, saved, I may ever bless thee. 
To the martyrs: Having suffered and been crowned, ye put the enemy to 
shame, and now dwell in the heavens, full of unapproachable light, О most wise 
martyrs, praying on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Heal Thou the incurable sufferings of my soul, О divine Trinity Who 
art piously worshipped in a single Godhead, rescue me from Gehenna and 
temptations, and grant me the eternal kingdom. 
Both now ..., In thy womb thou didst contain the Uncontainable One without 
confining Him. О pure Mother, ever beseech Him, that from all oppression and 
the assaults of the passions He deliver thy servants who glorify thee with love. 
 
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I pray unto Thee.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings. 
