--- PAGE 1 ---
ON TUESDAY EVENING: TONE VII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “No longer are we forbidden the tree of life ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Of old, a tree drove me from paradise, but now a tree hath restored me to 
paradise when Thou wast crucified, О Christ. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
О awesome wonder! How can the Creator, standing before a created being, be 
condemned and crucified for the salvation of mankind? 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
О Cross of Christ, the amazement of the holy angels and the great wounding 
of the demons: Save thy servants! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today Judas keepeth vigil ...”: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Beholding her Lamb stretched out upon the Tree, the Virgin, the unblemished 
ewe-lamb, cried aloud: “Woe is me, О my most sweet Child! What is this strange 
and most glorious mystery? How hath the iniquitous assembly lifted Thee up 
upon a Cross, and given Thee gall to drink, Who fed me with manna?” 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
When Thy Virgin Mother beheld Thee nailed by the Jews to the Cross on 
Golgotha, condemned by an unrighteous verdict, О my Christ, she cried out: 
“Woe is me, О my most beloved Son! What is this strange sight? How can the 
senseless children of the Jews nail Thee, the Lord of all, to the Cross?” 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
О all-holy Lady, we have all come to know thee alone as her who was manifest 
as a virgin even after giving birth. And when thou beheldest Him to Whom thou 
hast given birth, with His hands willingly nailed to the Tree, thou didst cry out: “O 
Longsuffering One, Thou dost willingly die, delivering all who hymn Thee from 
death!” 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: О all-holy Virgin Lady, who hast given birth unto the Lord 
Who in His tender compassion was nailed to the Cross, pouring forth a stream of 
life upon the world: Entreat Him, that our souls may be saved; for thee alone do 
we the faithful have as a refuge, bulwark and aid. Wherefore, we flee to thy 
protection. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VII: 
No longer are we forbidden the Tree of life, for we have Thy Cross as our 
hope. О Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Suspended upon the Tree, О Immortal One, Thou didst break the snares of 
the devil. О Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Caring naught for all the things of earth, О holy martyrs, and 
having manfully preached Christ at the tribunal, ye received from Him rewards for 
your torments; but as ye have boldness, beseech Him, as the almighty God, that 
He save the souls of us who flee to you, we pray. 
Glory..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Once thou didst behold thy son upon the Tree, * thy heart 
was pierced by a lance of sadness, ** O most-pure One. 
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
ON TUESDAY NIGHT 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 
With the serenity of thy divine prayer cause thou the tempest of my lusts and 
passions to cease, О most immaculate one, that with a calm heart I may glorify 
thine ineffable birthgiving. 
Through thine Offspring hath all desire and sweetness come to be, О Lady 
Theotokos, for He driveth away all the bitterness engendered by the passions and 
transgressions of thy servants. 
Glory ..., Deliver me from the delusion of the demons, from oppression, harm 
and temptation, О most pure one, that with faith I may glorify thee who, after 
God, art my helper and protection. 
Both now ..., О Word of God, in the bush Thou didst reveal Thyself unto 
Moses, burning like fire, yet in nowise consuming it, showing forth an image of 
Thy nativity from the Virgin, through whom Thou didst assume human form. 
ODE III 
O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens * by 
Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing Spirit * 
hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
Earnestly entreat Him Who was lifted up upon the Cross and hath cast down 
Hades, О Theotokos, on behalf of those who ever faithfully hymn thee with 
sacred songs and hymns, О hope of the world and help of the faithful. 
Glory ..., О Lady who by thy birthgiving hast freed mankind from the 
corruption of death: Deliver me from the corruption of the passions, from 
infirmities and grievous transgressions, and by thy divine mediation grant me the 
life which groweth not old. 
Both now ..., Having immutably made Thyself like unto man in all things, О 
Word of God, thou didst manifestly issue forth from the pure Virgin, and hast 
revealed to all the thrice-radiant Godhead in the unchangeable Essence and 
immutable Hypostases. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * 
and I have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Spread forth thy mercy and tender compassion upon thy servants who ever 
pray to thee, О pure one, delivering them from dreadful torment By thy prayers. 
With pure prayer and fervent love I flee unto thee, О most immaculate one. 
Be thou the remission of my many transgressions, delivering and saving me. 
Glory ..., By thy birthgiving, О most pure Lady, thou hast shown thyself to be 
the mediatress of our Joy. Beseech Him, О most immaculate one, to deliver us 
from perils and grant unto me eternal life. 
Both now ..., О Christ God, Who left not the bosom of the Father when Thou 
didst become incarnate from the Virgin: Preserve Thy flock which worshippeth 
the divine images of Thy dispensation. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Night is bereft of light * for those without faith, О Christ, * but for 
the faithful there is enlightenment * in the sweetness of Thy words; * 
wherefore, I rise early unto Thee * and hymn Thy divinity. 
Thee do I entreat, О pure Virgin, to deliver my soul from gloomy sin, and to 
illumine it with the divine radiance of repentance and thy mercy. 
By thy prayers and supplications deliver those who find themselves in the 
midst of an abyss of cruel temptations and violent passions, О most holy and pure 
one, and save those who praise thee. 
Glory ..., О most holy Theotokos, who didst conceive God in thy virginal 
womb and hast given birth unto Him: from all eternal damnation deliver those 
who hymn thee. 
Both now ..., Knowing thee to be the Mother of God and our helper, О pure 
one, we set thee before the compassionate Lord as the mediatress of our salvation. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: I cried out to Thee, О Lord, when I was afflicted, * and Thou didst 
raise up my life, * О greatly Merciful One. 
Entreat thy Son, Who was lifted up upon the Cross and hath delivered 
mankind from corruption, О Lady, that we be saved. 
О most pure Lady, forsake me not who place my trust in thee; but hasten thou 
unto mine aid. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., From grief deliver those who invoke thy divine name, and free them 
from dreadful torment. 
Both now ..., О most pure Lady our steadfast hope, preserve those who with 
love hymn thee as the true Theotokos. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
Christ God, Who was crucified for our sake and hath cast down the dominion 
of death, do thou unceasingly entreat, О Virgin Theotokos, that He save our 
souls. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Of old the Children were shown to be * bedewed in the fiery 
furnace, * chanting and praising the one God saying: * 'Supremely exalted 
and exceedingly glorified is the God of our Fathers'. 
In distraction and grief, and amid misfortunes, О most pure one, I fervently 
call upon thee with all my heart: Anticipate my need, and deliver me and grant me 
peace, О pure one. 
The threefold billows of many transgressions and passions batter me and 
cause me to sink into the depths of destruction; but grant me thy hand and save 
me, О Theotokos, and have mercy upon me in thy might. 
Glory ..., I bring Thy Mother before Thee, О Savior and Lover of mankind, to 
pray for me. Receiving her, deliver me from transgressions and the judgment 
which is to come, and rescue me from everlasting torment. 
Both now ..., Possessed of a soul deadened by grievous crimes, I beseech thee, 
О Lady, who hast slain Hades by thy birthgiving: Grant me life through examples 
of repentance. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Christ Who is truly God, * the Cause of the existence of all, * let us 
supremely exalt and glorify * throughout all ages. 
From misfortunes, corruption and the passions save me, О most pure one; for 
I flee to thee, my hope and divine salvation. 
Having delivered me from evil accusers at the last hour, О Lady and Virgin, 
do thou thyself guide me to the divine habitation. 
Glory ..., Rouse thyself, О my soul, and, falling down, cry aloud unto the 
Theotokos: О hope and salvation of all, deliver me from eternal fire! 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., Let us hymn the Virgin who alone among women is blessed, 
glorifying and supremely exalting Christ throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O Mother of God and Virgin, * thou hast given birth and yet 
remained a virgin, * not in accordance with nature, * but by the 
condescension of God; * wherefore, we ever magnify thee, * who alone 
wast deemed worthy * of the wonders of God.  
The Theotokos offereth Thee entreaty on my behalf, О Christ my Master. 
Accepting it, deliver me from all torment. 
I ever entreat thee, О Lady: Deliver my lowly soul from the judgment and 
torment which are to come. 
Glory ..., Beseech my Creator and Fashioner, О Virgin, that He deliver me 
from the dread judgment and grant me life. 
Both now ..., О all-immaculate and pure Virgin Mother, from spiritual 
defilement deliver thy flock which magnifies thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VII: 
The Church crieth out to Thee, О Christ God, bowing down before Thee in 
the pine, cedar and cypress: Grant victories to the faithful for the sake of the 
Theotokos, and have mercy on us! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet, 
for He is holy. 
О Christ God, Who for my sake endured nailing to the Cross, accept my ready 
praise, and save me. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: O Virgin Theotokos * unceasingly entreat Christ our God, 
* who wast crucified for us * and arose again destroying the dominion of death, ** 
that He save our souls. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VII: 
О Christ, Thou didst show the tree of Thy Cross to be more radiant than fire 
and more powerful than flame, for it consumeth our sins and illumineth the hearts 
of those who hymn Thy voluntary crucifixion. О Christ God, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
О Christ God, Who hast dominion over the incorporeal hosts and knowest 
the slothfulness of my soul, save me by Thy Cross, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
To the martyrs: Rejoice, О ye righteous! Let the heavens be glad! For having 
struggled on earth, the martyrs trampled the enemy underfoot. Let the Church 
triumphant leap up, celebrating Christ God, the one Judge of the contest and 
Awarder of trophies, Who granteth the world great mercy 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: When the Virgin beheld Thee crucified, О Lord, she cried 
out to Thee weeping: “I hymn Thine ineffable longsuffering, О my Son, and 
Thine utter and divine condescension toward mankind!” 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII: 
When Thou wast crucified, О Christ, the enemy was bound and death slain, 
and the souls held fast in the nether regions of Hades were loosed from their 
bonds. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
О Thou Who for our sake willingly accepted crucifixion, crush the enemy who 
refuses to recognize Thee as the true God, and save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Ever preserved by the Cross of thy Son, О Virgin, we elude 
the attacks of the demons; wherefore, hymning thee as is meet, we glorify thee, О 
all-hymned Theotokos. 
ODE I 
Canon to the precious and life-creating Cross of the Lord, the acrostic 
whereof is: “When the Cross was planted it uprooted deception,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: At thy command O Lord, * the nature of the waters that beforehand 
flowed freely was transformed * and became like the earth; * whereby Israel 
having traversed them dryshod * chanted unto Thee a hymn of victory. 
Mocked, the Master endured crucifixion, removing the mockeries of mankind 
in that He is the Lover of mankind. He is pierced by a spear, thereby slaying the 
adverse foe. 
Wielding Thy Cross like a bow, О merciful Savior, with the darts of the nails 
Thou didst wound the adversary, and heal us who of old were wounded by him. 
To the martyrs: By the blood of the saints the abominable defilements of 
blood offered to the idols were abolished; and the whole earth is sanctified, ever 
blessing the martyrs with praises. 
To the martyrs: The hosts of heaven lifted their voice in song, beholding those 
on earth doing battle against incorporeal foes. Wherefore, the Judge of the contest 
hath crowned them victors. 
Theotokion: “The record of Adam was torn asunder when Thou wast pierced 
by the spear, О my Son,” the most pure Lady cried out; “Wherefore, I hymn Thy 
suffering, which poureth forth dispassion upon all, О Master.” 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos. The composition of Joseph, 
in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О Theotokos, preserve thy people, who hymn thy mighty works with love, and 
deliver them from harm; for thou art the intercessor, guide and confirmation of 
all, О pure one. 
О Virgin who gavest rise to the Water of immortality, grant us the waters of 
healing, washing away all the deadly passions of our souls and bodies. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
О Lady, full of the grace of God, thou wast shown to be the honored 
habitation of Him Who honored the nature of our forefather; wherefore, we 
beseech thee, О pure one: Deliver us from all dishonor. 
Having given birth to the Sun of righteousness for the world, О all-
immaculate maiden, drive the darkness away from those who hymn thee with faith 
in this thy splendid and holy temple. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Lord and Savior, * Who in the beginning established the heavens 
* by Thine all-powerful Word, * and by the divine and all-accomplishing 
Spirit * hath granted them all their strength, * do Thou establish me on the 
unshakeable rock of Thy confession. 
О Jesus, Who stretched out the heaven as it were a curtain, Thou didst stretch 
out Thy hands upon the Tree, healing the intemperance of Adam, in that Thou art 
merciful, snatching all from the hands of the lying enemy. 
With thorns the iniquitous men crowned Thee, О Christ our King, Who hast 
crowned men with glory, uprooted the thorns of Adam’s disobedience, and 
planted the plant of understanding for all. 
To the martyrs: Mortal in essence, therein ye deigned to teach immortality, О 
most wise ones; wherefore, wounds and tribulations, persecutions and beatings, 
and the severing of your members, did ye all endure, rejoicing, О martyrs. 
To the martyrs: With steadfast intent ye brought low the lying enemy who 
boasted that he will destroy all things, О ye spiritual athletes who humbled 
yourselves for Christ; and having arrayed yourselves against him, ye were exalted 
with divine might. 
Theotokion: О Mother and ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb Who is slaughtered 
of His own will going to His Passion, thou sheddest fountains of tears, saying: 
“What is this sacred thing, О my Child? How dost Thou die, intending to bring 
life to those who have died?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
In this thy divine temple, wherein thou hast shown forth a well-spring of 
miracles, О pure one, grant the salvific petitions of thy servants; and deliver them 
from torment, ever pouring forth thy divine visitation. 
Having given birth to Christ, the Abyss of mercies and Bestower of all good 
things, in a manner transcending cause and all telling, О pure one, thou hast truly 
shown this thy divine temple to be the cleansing of all the passions, through thy 
divine overshadowing. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О Virgin Theotokos, joy of all; for thou hast 
truly given birth to the joy and gladness of the whole world, Him Who is the 
Lover of mankind, driving away sinful grief, О Bride of God. 
О Virgin, thou noetic coffer, who hast truly given birth to the incorrupt 
Manna: Come among us at this hour; and of all defilement rid us who in a pure 
manner call thee blessed. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Having never left the bosom of the Father, * Thou didst descend to 
earth O Christ God, * I have heard of the mystery of Thy dispensation, * 
and I have glorified Thee, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having appeared on earth as a man, Thou didst make mankind heavenly; and 
suspended upon the Tree, О Master, Thou didst exalt with Thyself all who hymn 
Thy sufferings. 
For mortals Thou didst die, О Life, and for the unjust Thou didst endure 
violent suffering, О my righteous Jesus. We hymn Thine infinite tender 
compassion, О Long-suffering One. 
To the martyrs: The onslaught of wild beasts, the raging of the fire, the 
severing of hands and feet, the mutilation of your members, and all other tortures 
which win divine delight, did ye endure, О martyrs. 
To the martyrs: Crying out to Christ, the God of all, from the extremities of 
your bodies, О spiritual athletes, ye were heard, and have now been set high upon 
the rock of divine perfection. 
Theotokion: Make entreaty for us to Him Who became incarnate from thee, О 
Theotokos, that we who glorify His sufferings may find help in time of peril. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Of old, Habbakuk proclaimed thee the mountain overshadowed by the virtues, 
protecting all from the burning of the malice of our ancient foe, О most pure 
Lady Theotokos. 
Offer supplication unto the Lord Who became incarnate from thy most pure 
blood, О Lady, that He save from all harm thy people, who bless thee as is meet. 
This thy temple, full of the grace of God, hath become a source of healing for 
our souls and bodies, О most glorious one; for it causeth every disease to cease 
and washeth away the passions of those who with faith call thee blessed. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
By thy fervent and honorable visitation, О Virgin Lady, save all who with love 
flee to thine aid, and visit and grant their petitions which lead unto life. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Having risen at dawn out of the night, * I entreat Thee O Lord my 
God: * grant me the forgiveness of my sins, * and guide my steps to the 
light * of thy commandments, I pray Thee.  
Accepting crucifixion for the removal of evils, О Word of God, Thou didst 
taste gall, abolishing the bitter harm wrought by the pleasing fruit. Glory to Thy 
great loving-kindness! 
By Thy suspension upon the Cross, Thou didst cause the whole earth to quake 
by Thy divine might and healed the abasement thereof, О Master; thereby making 
wavering hearts steadfast in the knowledge of Thee. 
To the martyrs: Belial everywhere spread his evil nets, yet he did not ensnare 
the martyrs of Christ; for, receiving wings of fire, they reached the divine 
mansions. 
To the martyrs: Deified by God with the hand of His abundance, О passion-
bearers, ye were in nowise daunted by painful tortures, since for you it was as 
though others were suffering; and ye remained thus, О most wise ones. 
Theotokion: When Thou wast hanging upon the Cross, the pure Virgin, 
wracked with lamentation, cried out: “With what eyes shall I look upon the 
burning Eye Who driest up all the depths, О my Son?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Night is bereft of light * for those without faith, О Christ, * but for 
the faithful there is enlightenment * in the sweetness of Thy words; * 
wherefore, I rise early unto Thee * and hymn Thy divinity. 
Keeping vigil, we are weighed down by the sleep of sin, О pure one; yet in thy 
most honored temple take pity on us by thy vigilant divine supplication, О Bride 
of God. 
О pure one, grant a helping hand unto all of us who have recourse unto thee; 
wash away the defilement of all evil, and By thy prayers cleanse us of illness. 
О most pure Theotokos, who conceived God in thy virginal womb and hast 
given birth to Him: From all everlasting condemnation deliver those who hymn 
thee. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
The souls of those who come to thy temple with faith, having grown old 
through sins, are renewed, О most immaculate one, and they all glorify thee as is 
meet. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Sailing in the tempest of the cares of life, * together with the ship I 
have been submerged by sins, * and cast to the soul-corrupting beast, * 
wherefore like Jonah I cry to Thee, O Christ: * Lead me up from the deadly 
abyss. 
О only Redeemer, Thou didst pay Thy saving Blood as our price, redeeming 
us who were held captive, and bringing us to Thy Father, slaying the tyrant by the 
Cross, О supremely good Christ. 
Of old, through intemperance I suffered a grievous fall, but Christ, lifted up 
upon the Cross, His arms stretched out, exalted me, who had fallen, and 
manifestly healed all my wounds. 
To the martyrs: In nowise sleeping the slumber of delusion, О martyrs, ye 
lulled to sleep every assault of the tormentors; and having fallen into the excellent 
sleep of the righteous, О blessed ones, ye became ever-watchful advocates for all. 
To the martyrs: Established firmly upon the rock of Christ’s divine precepts, 
О most glorious martyrs, ye remained unmoved by the wiles of the enemy; and 
with divine wisdom ye trampled him underfoot, divinely hastening to God. 
Theotokion: О Theotokos, thou hast given birth to a young Child, Who is 
known to exist timelessly with the Father, before all ages, and Who by His Cross 
hath renewed mankind, which had grown old through sins by the counsel of the 
author of evil. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy 
on us!  
Thou alone hast poured forth the Water of salvation upon us, О only pure 
one, drying up the burning of delusions; and bedewing the true understanding of 
thy servants. 
О animate city of our God, free thy flock from godless barbarians, earthquake 
and want, and from every temptation. 
With the application of thy prayers cure the sores of our souls, О Theotokos, 
that we may hymn thee with divine voices. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
О Virgin maiden, who by thy most pure birthgiving released Eve from pain: 
Release me from the pain of the passions of soul and body. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Of old the Children were shown to be * bedewed in the fiery 
furnace, * chanting and praising the one God saying: * 'Supremely exalted 
and exceedingly glorified is the God of our Fathers'. 
The life of our first parents, devoid of pain, did I find when thou wast 
suspended upon the Cross and willingly died, slaying the serpent, О greatly 
merciful Jesus Christ. 
We have all been delivered from the curse of the law; for the Bestower of the 
law was lifted up upon the Cross, pouring forth ever-flowing blessing, grace, 
mercy, and the abolition of corruption. 
To the martyrs: Approaching tortures with willing haste, the martyrs 
voluntarily emulated Him Who suffered; and, crowned by Him, they now join 
chorus with the angels. 
To the martyrs: Giving your bodies over to various torments, О all-famed 
martyrs, ye drowned the incorporeal foe in the streams of your blood, pouring 
forth fountains of healing. 
Theotokion: “How can I not weep, beholding Thee upon the Cross, О my 
most sweet Child? How can I not lament Thee Who sufferest unjustly, О most 
righteous Judge?”, the Virgin Mother exclaimed. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
О all-hymned Virgin, who hast given birth to the divine Fire, burn up the 
tinder of the passions of those who hymn thee, and illumine all with the light of 
repentance, we pray. 
О incorrupt maiden, deliver us from corruption; О animate palace of God, 
show us to be temples of the divine Spirit, that we may unceasingly hymn thee 
with faith in thy temple. 
Thou pourest forth streams of healings upon all, for thou hast given birth to 
the Source of life, О Theotokos. By thy fervent supplication cleanse this thy flock 
of defilement, О Bride of God. 
All the divine prophets, beholding the figures of thy divine birthgiving, 
chanted with joy, crying: О all-hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Unconsumed by fire, the bush on Sinai spake unto Moses, * slow of 
speech and stammering, * and revealed God unto him; * and zeal for God 
showed forth the three children who chanted hymns * to be unvanquished 
by the fire. * O all ye His works, praise ye the Lord * and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages. 
The blood and water which flowed from Thy side renewed the whole world 
and poured forth incorruption, О Savior, and brought abominable sacrifices and 
the shedding of corrupt blood to an end. Wherefore, all of us, Thy works, hymn 
Thee as Lord and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Thou wast ringed about with a crown of thorns, wast given gall and vinegar to 
eat, wast spat upon, beaten and lifted up upon the Cross, Thy hands pierced with 
nails. And I, saved thereby, cry out to Thee: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
To the martyrs: Most splendidly enriched from the inexhaustible treasuries of 
truth, О spiritual athletes, ye spat upon all the poverty of the idols and showed 
yourselves to be enrichers of the poor, crying aloud: Hymn the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
To the martyrs: Having refused to obey the unlawful edicts of the tyrants, О 
martyrs, ye were cast into a fiery furnace like the youths, and therein found the 
dew of God which cooled you, as ye cried: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the 
Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Theotokion: The ark of the law prefigured thee of old, О pure one, containing 
not the tablets of the law, but Christ, the Bestower of the law, Whom iniquitous 
men nailed to the Cross, and Who saveth us who cry: Hymn the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom 
all the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O 
ye priests praise, and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages. 
Pouring forth an abyss of miracles upon the world, О all-hymned Virgin, dry 
up the stench of our passions, and pour forth the dew of remission upon us who 
honor thee with undoubting faith. 
The Sun of righteousness, Who shone forth from thee upon those sitting in 
the darkness of the passions, made thee light, О all-hymned and pure one; 
wherefore, we hymn thee as is meet, О Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
As a most splendid temple of God, О pure one, show thy servants, assembled 
in thy holy temple, to be habitations of the Spirit; for we glorify thee throughout 
all ages. 
With the light of thy birthgiving thou hast wondrously enlightened the whole 
world, О Theotokos, bearing in thine arms the true God Who ever enlightens 
those who cry with faith: Hymn the Lord, all ye works of the Lord, and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages! 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Mother of God and Virgin, * thou hast given birth and yet 
remained a virgin, * not in accordance with nature, * but by the 
condescension of God; * wherefore, we ever magnify thee, * who alone 
wast deemed worthy * of the wonders of God.  
The might of the enemy in nowise failed until Thou didst cry out mightily on 
the Tree to Thine beginningless Father, and called Thy scattered sheep to the 
knowledge of Thee, О Christ, mighty Master. 
Thou wast willingly lifted up upon the Cross like a lamb, О Master, snatching 
Thy reason-endowed sheep from the wolf, О Savior, and enclosing those who 
hymn thee in the fold of Thy precepts. 
To the martyrs: Shown to be emulators of Thy sufferings, the right glorious 
passion-bearers endured many and varied methods of torture, О Lover of 
mankind; wherefore, they received crowns of glory and have been deemed worthy 
of Thy kingdom, О Christ. 
To the martyrs: The solar rays of grace shine round about, illumining the 
faithful on the right laudable feast of the honored passion-bearers; wherefore, ever 
celebrating this, we are delivered from the darkness of grievous transgressions. 
Theotokion: Thy Son, the noetic Light, shone forth on the Cross О most pure 
one, rebuking the princes of darkness; and darkening the light of the sun, 
illumining the fullness of the faithful, О most immaculate one. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Conceiving without knowing corruption, * and lending thy flesh to 
the Word, * O Mother unwedded and Virgin Theotokos, * thou art the 
vessel of the uncircumscribable One, * and dwelling place of thy Creator, * 
thee do we magnify. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou wast shown to be more sacred than the hosts on high, for thou hast 
given birth to the Creator of all, О holy Theotokos, Mother who knewest not a 
man; wherefore, with the angels we glorify thee, unceasingly hymning thy mighty 
works. 
Enlightened by the rays of the divine Spirit, the most sacred prophet of old 
beheld thee as a mountain overshadowed, О Virgin Theotokos; wherefore, we on 
earth bless thee with the angels, as thou didst foretell, О thou who art blessed of 
God. 
Thou wast shown to be the jar holding the divine Manna, and wast seen to be 
a ladder leading mortals up from earth, О Virgin Theotokos who alone knewest 
not wedlock; wherefore, we, the faithful, having assembled, glorify thee as is meet, 
О divinely joyous one. 
О maiden who wast the dwelling-place of the Godhead, bathing me with tears, 
cleanse me, who have become a den of soul-destroying thieves and a place where 
every iniquity is wrought; and show me to be an abode of the divine Spirit. 
О Virgin Lady, who alone hast given birth to the pre-eternal Light: Deliver me 
from everlasting darkness, and enlighten my soul which hath become wholly 
darkened through the passions of life, that I may ever glorify thee with love. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VII: 
О Master Who lovest mankind, Who art the Bestower of life, by Thy Cross 
Thou didst redeem the whole world. О Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
The Vine of life was nailed to the Cross, and the nations embraced paradise 
with the thief. This is the glory of the Church! These are the riches of the 
kingdom! О Lord Who suffered for our sake, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: The all-praised passion-bearers of Christ were shown to be 
beacons for the world, crying aloud: Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  

--- PAGE 17 ---
 Stavrotheotokion: When the all-immaculate one beheld Thee willingly nailed 
to the Tree, weeping, she hymned Thy might. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VII: 
Comely and good to taste was the fruit which brought death upon me. But 
Christ is the Tree of life, and eating thereof I die not, but cry out with the thief: 
Remember me in Thy kingdom, О Lord! 
Thou didst stretch forth Thy hands upon the Cross, in Thy great goodness 
setting aright the fall of Adam, who stretched out his hands to the fruit of the tree, 
О Compassionate One; wherefore, we glorify Thee, О Benefactor and Lord. 
On the place of the skull the assembly of the Jews crucified Thee, О Christ 
our King, Who crushed the head of the wicked destroyer, pouring forth upon us 
rivers of remission from Thy holy side. 
To the martyrs: Emulating the honored and saving sufferings of Christ, О all-
famed martyrs, ye endured many and varied tortures, and together have passed 
over into immortality; wherefore, ye are blessed. 
Glory ..., О holy Trinity, preserve us, Thy servants, who hymn Thee, 
strengthen us with the power of the Cross, and instruct us how to reach the 
heavenly city, that, residing there, we may find mercy. 
Both now ..., Beholding Him Who was born from thee, crucified, О pure 
Mother, thou didst shed tears, thy womb in turmoil, and cried aloud: “How dost 
Thou willingly suffer these things, О my Son, desiring to deliver mankind from 
the passions?” 
 
On Wednesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon, the hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord. 
