--- PAGE 1 ---
ON THURSDAY EVENING: TONE VII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “No longer are we forbidden the tree of life ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
That Thou mightest make man a god, Thou didst become a man and wast 
crucified, О supremely good Christ. Glory be to Thy power! 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
When the assembly of the Jews condemned Thee to die on the Cross, О Jesus, 
the earth quaked and the sun hid its light. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
The iniquitous assembly crowned Thee with thorns, О Immortal and holy 
King, Who cuttest off the thorns of delusion at the root. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Today Judas keepeth vigil ...”: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Beholding her Lamb stretched out upon the Tree, the Virgin, the unblemished 
ewe-lamb, cried aloud: “Woe is me, О my most sweet Child! What is this strange 
and most glorious mystery? How hath the iniquitous assembly lifted Thee up 
upon a Cross, and given Thee gall to drink, Who fed me with manna?” 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
When Thy Virgin Mother beheld Thee nailed by the Jews to the Cross on 
Golgotha, condemned by an unrighteous verdict, О my Christ, she cried out: 
“Woe is me, О my most beloved Son! What is this strange sight? How can the 
senseless children of the Jews nail Thee, the Lord of all, to the Cross?” 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
О all-holy Lady, we have all come to know thee alone as the one who wast 
revealed to be a virgin after giving birth. And when thou didst behold Him to 
Whom thou hast given birth, with His hands willingly nailed to the Tree, thou 
didst cry out: “O Longsuffering One, Thou dost willingly die, delivering all who 
hymn Thee from death!” 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: О all-holy Virgin Lady, who hast given birth unto the Lord 
Who in His loving-kindness was nailed to the Cross, pouring forth a stream of life 
upon the world: Entreat Him, that our souls may be saved; for thee alone do we, 
the faithful have as a refuge, bulwark and aid. Wherefore, we flee to thy 
protection. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VII: 
No longer are we forbidden the Tree of life, for we have Thy Cross as our 
hope. О Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Suspended upon the Tree, О Immortal One, Thou didst break the snares of 
the devil. O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Glory be to Thee, О Christ God, Thou boast of the apostles 
and joy of the martyrs, who preached the consubstantial Trinity! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: When the all-immaculate one beheld Thee willingly nailed 
to the Tree, weeping, she hymned Thy dominion. 
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
ON THURSDAY NIGHT: TONE VII 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: To God Who overthrew Pharaoh in the Red Sea * let us chant a 
hymn of victory, * for He hath been glorified.  
Looking toward the impending end of my life, О Lady, I cry aloud: Grant me 
the cleansing of mine offenses, О Bride of God. 
Hastening to the abyss of Thy beneficence, I cry aloud: О good Lady, deliver 
me from all torment. 
Glory ..., О Lady, accept us who flee to thee with faith, and grant us 
deliverance from perils and tribulations. 
Both now ..., In accordance with the prophecy thou hast restored the fallen 
tabernacle of Adam, О most pure one who didst bear God the Savior in thy 
womb. 
ODE III 
Irmos: My heart hath been established in the Lord; * my horn hath been 
exalted in my God; * my mouth hath been enlarged over the enemy; * and I 
am gladdened in Thy salvation.  
О most pure one who didst ineffably conceive God the Master, deliver and 
save me who am beset by the tempest of sin. 
With rays of repentance illumine me who am held fast in the night of unseemly 
offenses, О maiden, ever granting that I may become a child of the light. 
Glory ..., О Theotokos who hast given birth to the Bread of heaven, feeding 
the hearts of all the faithful, fill thou my starving and passion-plagued soul. 
Both now ..., Acknowledging thy divine birthgiving, I have been made 
steadfast, О Virgin, and, enriched by thy help, I cry out: Holy art Thou, О Lord 
Who savest our souls! 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I heard report of Thee * and became filled with fear; * I understood 
Thy works * and became filled with awe, O Lord.  
Disdain me not, neither put me to shame for I earnestly groan and cry out to 
thee from the depths of my heart, О Lady. 
Utterly consume the thorns which pierce my wretched soul, the lusts of the 
flesh, О Lady who hast given birth to the divine Fire. 
Glory ..., Grant me remission offenses, О most blessed and pure one, and 
deliver me from everlasting and terrible torment. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Both now ..., The Word Who made His abode within thee, О most pure one, 
hath transformed my nature, which had fallen through disobedience. 
ODE V 
Irmos: My soul riseth unto Thee at dawn, O God, * for Thou art light, and 
Thy commandments * have become healing for Thy servants, * O Lover of 
mankind.  
I have made myself like unto the irrational beasts, utter wretch that I am, 
serving mine accursed flesh with irrational passions. But do thou, О Theotokos, 
grant that I may come to my senses. 
Have mercy upon me who have sinned more than all mankind, and who flee 
to thy fervent protection, О Virgin Theotokos, and rescue me from torments. 
Glory ..., May those who confess thee to be the Theotokos, О Virgin Mother 
of God, be deemed worthy to receive through thee the kingdom and sustenance 
which pass not away. 
Both now ..., О blessed and most glorious Mother who knewest not a man, 
grant life to my soul, which hath been slain by my sins and buried beneath 
unrestrained passions. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy 
on us!  
The tempest of sin assails me, leading me into the corruption of despair, О 
Virgin; but extend unto me a firm and mighty helping hand. 
Pour forth upon me the oil of the fervent loving-kindness which is within 
thee, О Lady, delivering me from offenses and rescuing me from everlasting fire. 
Glory ..., О Virgin maiden who hast released Eve from pain by thy most pure 
birthgiving, release me also from the pain of the passions which assail my soul and 
body. 
Both now ..., Thou dost hymn God Who was incarnate from thee, О pure and 
most immaculate Virgin Mother; and, gazing upon Him, thou dost lament Him 
Who was lifted up upon the Cross. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VII: 
О pure one, the Fruit of thy womb hath planted the Cross in the ends of the 
earth and delivered the world from corruption; wherefore, we magnify thee, the 
most glorious one. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: Cast into the fiery furnace, * the venerable children transformed the 
fire into dew, * crying aloud thus in hymnody: * Blessed art Thou O Lord, 
the God of our fathers!  
The threat of my manifold transgressions hath increased, О pure one, and, 
deserving condemnation, I fall down and cry unto thee: Before the end grant me 
cleansing, tears of compunction and the correction of my morals. 
In that thou hast given birth to the Life of all, О pure and most pure one, by 
thy divine works grant life unto me who am in sore distress because of my vile 
transgressions, and approach the grave in despair. 
Glory ..., О good Birthgiver of God, delivering from spiritual death those who 
with faith call upon thine immortal grace, grant them the kingdom by thy most 
pure prayers. 
Both now ..., We glorify the unapproachable birthgiving of the Virgin, whereby 
we have been delivered from death; wherefore, reborn unto incorruption, we cry 
out: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God of our fathers! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom 
all the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O 
ye priests praise, and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages. 
The furnace of the passions consumes me, О Virgin, and devours me with the 
fire of lusts; but, anticipating my need, quench it with the dew of thy mercy, 
imparting coolness unto my soul. 
I have defiled my soul and rendered my flesh corrupt through lust, wallowing 
therein. And I have become the mockery of all, and an object of ridicule unto the 
enemy. О Lady Theotokos, be thou my helper! 
Glory ..., Beseech God to Whom thou hast given birth, О Virgin, that He send 
down upon those who honor thee with faith salvation, release from misfortunes, 
speedy deliverance from grievous ailments, and eternal grace. 
Both now ..., The Lord, Who created Adam according to His image, having 
assumed his substance and abolished the primal curse, hymn ye, О priests, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: O all-hymned one, * who art higher in eminence than the heavens: * 
having seedlessly conceived the beginningless Word * thou hast given birth 
to the incarnate God for all mankind. * Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
О most radiant Virgin Mother and Theotokos, with the light of thy 
supplications do thou radiantly guide to the fear of God my wretched soul, which 
hath been grievously darkened by carnal pleasures. 
Despairing of salvation because of the multitude of mine offenses, I am at a 
loss, О all-holy Lady. Send down upon me thy benefactions and mercy. 
Glory ..., Thy birthgiving, which transcendeth nature, О Theotokos, filleth the 
angels with wonder and mankind with awe; for it is ineffable and unapproachable 
to all. And hymning it, we piously glorify thee. 
Both now ..., Thou hast stripped away my garments of mortality and 
corruption, О Virgin who for us gave birth to the incarnate Word, the robe of 
salvation. Wherefore, we all ever magnify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VII: 
The Church crieth out to Thee, О Christ God, bowing down before Thee in 
the pine, cedar and cypress: Grant victories to the faithful for the sake of the 
Theotokos, and have mercy one us! 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet, 
for He is holy. 
О Christ God, Who for my sake endured nailing to the Cross, accept my ready 
praise, and save me. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Protected by the Cross of thy Son, О Virgin, we evade the 
attacks of the demons; wherefore, hymning thee as is meet, we glorify thee, О 
unwedded Theotokos. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII: 
О Christ, Thou didst show the tree of Thy Cross to be more radiant than fire 
and more powerful than flame, for consuming sins, it illumineth the hearts of 
those who hymn Thy voluntary crucifixion. О Christ God, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: God is our King before the ages; * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
Ever gazing upon Thy Cross as it is exalted, О Lord, we faithfully hasten with 
hymns and songs, embracing it with fear and joy. Sanctify Thy servants, and bring 
peace to Thy world by its appearance, О only greatly Merciful One. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: О holy martyrs, ask that we may be given remission of our 
sins, and be delivered from the torments which await us, and from bitter death, we 
pray. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: О pure Ever-virgin Theotokos, beholding thy Son hanging 
upon the Cross, weeping as a mother thou didst magnify His awesome 
condescension, О Lady unwedded. 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VII: 
Thy precious Cross, О Christ, is the sword and invincible victory of the world, 
and laying low the invisible foe thereby, we hymn Thee with thanksgiving. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
О Thou Who by the tree of the Cross healed Adam’s condemnation, heal our 
broken hearts, and save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: The Fruit of thy womb planted the Cross in the ends of the 
earth and delivered the world from corruption; wherefore, we magnify thee, О all-
glorious one. 
ОDE I 
Canon of the precious and life-creating Cross of the Lord, the acrostic 
whereof is “On the Tree Christ set at naught the ancient bane,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: To God Who overthrew Pharaoh in the Red Sea * let us chant a 
hymn of victory, * for He hath been glorified.  
Lifted up upon the Cross, Christ drew all mankind to Himself, and cast down 
the enemy who had laid all low. 
From Thy life-bearing side Thou didst pour forth water upon my life, О 
Master, and as a mortal didst slay the enemy. 
To the martyrs: Bear ye earnest prayer to Christ for us, О passion-bearers, that 
we all may be delivered from the dread judgment. 
To the martyrs: О most wise martyrs, ye humbled yourselves for Christ’s sake; 
casting down the prideful foe with grace divine. 
Theotokion: Beholding on the Cross Him Who had shone forth from thee in 
His exceedingly great loving-kindness, О Lady, thou didst weep, glorifying Him. 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
In giving birth to God in the flesh, О most pure one, thou didst restore our 
first father Adam, who had fallen into the corruption of disobedience. 
In gladness we cry out to thee with the voice of Gabriel, О pure one: Rejoice, 
О most pure one, thou hope of all! Rejoice, О Bride of God! 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The Church of Christ hath been confirmed by faith; * wherefore she 
crieth out unceasingly in hymns, chanting: * Holy art Thou, O Lord! * and 
my spirit doth hymn Thee!  

--- PAGE 9 ---
О Thou Who dost breathe life into me, and art dispassionate in essence, how 
dost Thou endure suffering? How dost Thou die upon the Tree? Great is Thy 
mercy and long-suffering, О Savior! 
Thou wast unjustly lifted up upon the Cross between two thieves, О Word, 
and didst justify him who by faith acknowledged Thee as the Author of all 
creation Who suffered of His own will. 
To the martyrs: Enduring the convulsions of their flesh, the severing of their 
hands and feet, and all their members, the passion-bearers were deemed worthy of 
glory, and pray for us. 
To the martyrs: Made radiant in God by many and varied torments, ye have 
now inherited great glory, О wise ones, ever praying for our souls. 
Theotokion: By thy maternal supplications grant release from our debts, О 
pure Virgin who hast given birth to God the Word Who was nailed as a man to 
the Cross. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
In the image of the all-holy tabernacle God foretold thee to the law-giver on 
the mountain; for thou didst become the habitation of Him Who sanctifieth all. 
О Virgin, we have all understood thee to be the holy ground which without 
seed put forth for us Jesus Christ, the comely Grain Who feedeth those who bless 
thee with faith and love. 
The ways of God Most High were seen in thee, О Virgin, when He ineffably 
became incarnate; for thou wast the Mother of Him Who reigneth over all. 
Pondering thy divine birthgiving, О Virgin, enriched by thine aid, I cry aloud: 
Holy art Thou, О Lord, Who saveth our souls! 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: I heard report of Thee * and became filled with fear; * I understood 
Thy works * and became filled with awe, O Lord.  
Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross like a most comely cluster of grapes, О 
Master and Lover of mankind, exuding the wine of gladness. 
Willingly accepting sufferings in Thy flesh, О Master, Thou didst truly calm 
the greatly painful passions of mortals. 
To the martyrs: Shot through with arrows, the passion-bearers wounded the 
adversary and showed themselves to be physicians of our souls. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
To the martyrs: The passion-bearers arrayed themselves against the tyrants 
and, vanquishing them, were crowned with crowns of victory. 
Theotokion: О Virgin, without seed thou hast given birth to the Word Who in 
His goodness destroyed corruption on the Cross. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Habbakuk heard of thee, О most pure one, as the mountain illumined by the 
overshadowing of the Spirit; for from thee hath God revealed Himself incarnate. 
The assembly of the Orthodox is set aright, hymning thee as the all-holy 
Mother of God, and crying out to thee with the angel: “Rejoice!” 
Beaten is the face of Nestorius, who did not wish to consider thee the pure 
Theotokos; for thou didst truly give birth unto God, О most pure one. 
The Bridegroom found thee to be comely and radiant in goodness, О all-pure 
one, and He abode within thee and made thee the Theotokos. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: My soul riseth unto Thee at dawn, O God, * for Thou art light, and 
Thy commandments * have become healing for Thy servants, * O Lover of 
mankind.  
Lifted up upon the Tree in the flesh, О Master, Thou didst draw all creation 
out of the pit of evils unto the understanding of Thee, О Lover of mankind. 
Iniquitous men asked to crucify Thee at the place of the skull, О Jesus, Who 
dost crush the pernicious head of the serpent. 
To the martyrs: Ye halted the flow of ungodliness with your divine blood, O 
martyrs, and drowned the tyrant pharaoh therein. 
To the martyrs: Their fingernails pitilessly torn away, the passion-bearers rent 
vain-minded hearts asunder with their rebuke, and have become victors. 
Theotokion: God sanctified thy womb and dwelt therein, О holy and pure 
one; and lifted up upon the Cross, He raised up creation with Himself. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Loving thy godly, comely, most sweet and goodly beauty, О Virgin Sovereign 
Lady, the Master made His abode within thee. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О maiden, all-holy and splendid portal of grace, who hast illumined the whole 
world with thy most radiant light: Enlighten those who hymn thee. 
Let those who confess thee to be the Theotokos receive through thy light the 
kingdom and food which pass not away, О Mother, Virgin and Theotokos. 
Thou wast shown to be the temple of the Omnipotent One Who seeth all 
things; for, finding thy womb to be more honorable than the heavens, He dwelt 
therein, О all-pure Birthgiver of God. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Jonah cried out from the belly of Hades: * Lead my life up from 
corruption! * And we cry aloud unto Thee: * O almighty Savior, have mercy 
on us!  
Manifesting Thyself in the tender compassion of Thy mercy, О Physician of 
the infirm, by Thy Cross and sufferings Thou didst heal infirm human nature. 
Of old Adam brought condemnation upon himself through the tree; but now 
he hath been justified by the tree of the Cross, gaining access to paradise and 
receiving delight. 
We hymn Thee Who wast crucified in the flesh; we glorify Thee Who wast 
crowned with thorns and hast crowned us with glory, О supremely good King. 
To the martyrs: Having rejected the pernicious harm of the madness of 
idolatry, the spiritual athletes underwent tortures; and having died with Christ, 
they now reign. 
To the martyrs: Neither persecution, nor starvation, nor nakedness, nor 
tribulation, nor death could in anywise separate the godly passion-bearers from 
the love of Christ. 
Theotokion: Thou didst glorify Him Who became incarnate from thee, and 
gazing upon Him Who was lifted up upon the Cross, thou didst weep for Him, О 
holy and all-immaculate Virgin Mother. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Thou hast given birth to the only Benefactor as the God-man, Who dwelt 
among us, О Virgin Theotokos, that He might give life unto mankind. 
Thou hast given birth in two natures to Emmanuel, Who was the perfect 
Word from the beginning, and is now God incarnate, Who granteth us 
redemption. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
The word of God described thee beforehand as the ark which received the 
tablets of the law, О Theotokos, for thou didst receive in thy womb Him Who 
became incarnate for our sake. 
Even the fulsome tongues of the angels are unable to proclaim thy praises, О 
pure one; but we, taking it up now as servants, offer thee Gabriel’s cry: “Rejoice!”. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Of old the Children were shown to be * bedewed in the fiery 
furnace, * chanting and praising the one God saying: * 'Supremely exalted 
and exceedingly glorified is the God of our Fathers'. 
Lifting the burden of mine iniquities, Thou wast lifted up upon the Cross 
between the iniquitous, О supremely good Lord. Blessed art Thou, the supremely 
exalted Lord and God of our fathers. 
Pierced by the spear in Thy divine side, О Savior, Thou didst set aright the fall 
of Eve, who was created from Adam’s rib, ever commanding the fiery sword to 
grant me access to paradise. 
To the martyrs: Like stars affixed to the firmament of the Church, ye illumine 
creation with the splendor of your sufferings and the effulgence of healings. 
To the martyrs: The book of life ever offereth the recorded lives of the Lord’s 
martyrs, who diligently preserved the written statutes of God and suffered 
mightily. 
Theotokion: О all-holy one, beholding the most holy Word Who shone forth 
from thee, lifted up upon the holy Tree and sanctifying mortals, thou didst lament. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Of old, thine Offspring saved those who were in the fiery furnace; and now 
He hath saved us who cry aloud at His coming which transcendeth all telling: 
Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 
David the ancestor of God described thy glory, О all-immaculate Virgin, and 
manifestly prophesied thee as the Queen of creation, who standeth at the right 
hand of the God of our fathers. 
By the restoration of thy birthgiving thou didst renew the nature of mortals, О 
pure one; wherefore, we cry out to thee: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb 
throughout all ages, О Sovereign Lady! 

--- PAGE 13 ---
In His mercy the second Adam through thee, О most pure one, called to Him 
the first Adam, who had been condemned and held fast by death, and who now 
crieth aloud: Blessed art Thou, Who wast born and hast restored me! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before Whom 
all the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels tremble: * O 
ye priests praise, and ye people * supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages. 
The tree of understanding rendered me mortal; but, having died upon the Tree 
Thou didst enliven me, О my Christ, and enlightened me to chant: Hymn the 
Lord, О ye priests, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
О King, the law-breaking assembly crowned with thorns Thee, Who uprootest 
the thorns of first-formed Adam’s disobedience; and they suspended upon the 
Cross Thee, Who hast delivered all from the abyss of deception. 
Upon the Tree mindless men stretched Thee out, Who spread out the heavens 
with understanding, О Savior, Who healest our sufferings by Thy suffering, and 
causeth our pain to cease through the pain caused in Thy hands by the nails. 
To the martyrs: The relics of the martyrs emit the sweet fragrance of miracles 
for those who approach with undoubting heart, and they ever dispel the fetor of 
the passions, and in God impart health unto all. 
Theotokion: The ranks of the saints pray to the Master, Who issued forth 
from thy womb, and on the Cross showed them the path of suffering, О pure 
one; and they glorify thee as the Queen of all. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
The unapproachable Master of all, Whom the heavens cannot contain, was 
contained within thy womb, О Birthgiver of God; wherefore, with love we the 
faithful, supremely exalt thee throughout the ages. 
The Mind Who transcendeth all creation, and upon Whom human nature is 
unable to gaze, didst thou bear in thy most pure arms, О maiden; wherefore, with 
love we, the faithful, supremely exalt thee throughout all ages. 
Entreat God, Who was born of thee, О Virgin, that upon those who honor 
thee with faith He send down salvation, release from misfortunes, the speedy cure 
of grievous ailments, and eternal grace. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Knowing thee to be the splendid temple of the Most High, adorned with 
divers virtues, О all-holy Virgin, we piously hymn and glorify thee throughout all 
ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O all-hymned one, * who art higher in eminence than the heavens: * 
having seedlessly conceived the beginningless Word * thou hast given birth 
to the incarnate God for all mankind. * Wherefore, we all magnify thee.  
When they saw Thee lifted up upon the Cross, О Jesus, almighty King of ages, 
the sun was darkened, the earth quaked, and the splendor of the veil of the temple 
was rent asunder. 
The iniquitous ran Thy hands and feet through with nails, pierced Thy life-
bearing side with a spear, and gave Thee gall and vinegar to drink, О my Christ, 
Thou true God and delight of all. 
To the martyrs: They who were broken by all manner of tortures, broke 
asunder the nets of the author of evil; and having been crowned with victory, the 
valiant spiritual athletes are called blessed. 
To the martyrs: Through the deposit of their relics the passion-bearers 
sanctified the whole earth and, cast into the midst of the fire and mystically 
consumed, they set at naught the vile stench of the sacrifices of the idols. 
Theotokion: О blessed one, who art holier than the cherubim, and hast given 
birth in the flesh unto the Word of God, Who was willingly lifted up upon the 
Cross: Earnestly pray to Him on behalf of us all. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Most perfect humanity was received from thee, О most pure maiden, when 
the Word united Himself to animate flesh and a soul adorned with discourse; 
wherefore, all of us, the faithful, magnify thee. 
Let the foolishness of the rhetors keep silence, but let the trumpet of the 
apostles sound forth, praising thee, О Virgin, with cries of truth, and declaring 
thee the to be the true Theotokos. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Because of thee mercy was shown to mankind, which was hypostaticaily 
united to the true Word, О Virgin, and by God’s gift became divine; wherefore, 
we all ever magnify thee. 
The mystery of thy birthgiving was first understood through the visions of the 
prophets, О maiden, who for the sake of mankind hast given birth to the 
incarnate God, Who delivereth us from perils By thy prayers. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VII:  
О Master Who lovest mankind, Who art the Bestower of life, by Thy Cross 
Thou didst redeem the whole world. О Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
The Vine of life was nailed to the Cross, and the nations embraced paradise 
with the thief. This is the glory of the Church! These are the riches of the 
kingdom! О Lord Who suffered for our sake, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Celebrating the memorial of Thy holy passion-bearers, О 
Christ, we hymn Thee, crying aloud: Glory be to Thee, О Lord! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: When thou didst behold thine own Son upon the Tree of 
old, О most pure one, thy heart was wounded by the sword of grief. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE VII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VII: 
Comely and good to taste was the fruit which brought death upon me. But 
Christ is the Tree of life, and eating thereof I die not, but cry out with the thief: 
Remember me in Thy kingdom, О Lord! 
Healing the sickness of Adam, which was caused by the counsel of the enemy, 
when Thou wast lifted up upon the Tree, Thy hands and feet pierced with nails, О 
King of all, Thou didst endure pain; wherefore, we glorify Thy long-suffering, О 
Word. 
Between two outlaws the assembly of the Jews crucified Thee, О Christ, the 
only Bestower of the law and Redeemer, Who delivereth the race of mankind 
from all iniquity; wherefore, we magnify Thee. 
To the martyrs: Valiantly wearing the wounds of many tortures like beautiful 
ornaments, the spiritual athletes were shown to be the splendid adornment of the 
Church, ever praying for our souls. 
Glory ..., О Holy Trinity, from torments deliver Thy faithful servants, who 
believe in Thee as a single Godhead, unceasingly glorified with piety; and grant us 
Thine everlasting kingdom. 
Both now ..., Seeing Thee without form or beauty, suspended upon the tree of 
the Cross in the flesh, О Christ, the all-pure Virgin cried out in pain: Woe is me! 
How have the iniquitous wounded Thee, О my Child?” 
 
On Friday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the 
footstool of His feet, for He is holy.  
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
 
Communion Verse: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, 
O God. 
