--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY EVENING: TONE VIII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of repentance, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
I have acquired neither compunction, * nor a wellspring of tears, * nor fervent 
confession, * nor weeping which washeth me clean, nor humility of heart; * I have 
been neither an emulator of the publican, * nor of the harlot, nor of the prodigal 
son. * How, therefore, shall I find remission for my many sins? * But in the 
judgments which Thou knowest, ** save me, О Christ. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
I have made myself a stranger * to every commandment of God; * in every 
way I have neglected higher virtue; * mindlessly wasting my whole life in 
slothfulness; * and I have committed * every unseemly and iniquitous act * in 
fornication. * Wherefore, since Thou art compassionate О Christ, ** have pity, 
and freely save me. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
In Thine anger rebuke me not * who am the work of Thy hands, * and who 
with my foolish mind * have torn myself away from goodness, О Lover of 
mankind, * and Who in the abyss of Thine ineffable compassion * wast for my 
sake well-pleased to become like unto me. * But through the supplications of 
Thine Ever-virgin Mother, О Word, * grant me divine conversion, ** in that Thou 
art God. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy forerunner, in the same melody: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О blessed Forerunner John, * with love ever return my lowly soul * to the 
Lord, * and by thy sacred mediations * quench for me the fire of pleasures, * 
guiding me to the fulfillment * of the precepts of God, * and truly cleansing the 
senses of my heart, ** that I may glorify thee. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
О all-praised Forerunner John, * thou offspring of a barren woman, * pure 
orchard of the Master * and adornment of mankind, * divine preserver of my 

--- PAGE 2 ---
lowly soul: * By thy prayers and aid * grant me readiness to forgive, * delivering 
me from the wiles of the serpent ** and his wicked treachery and attacks. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Wholly delightful and full of divine bliss, * О ever-glorious one, * thou hast 
gladdened all * who come to thee with faith, * delighting the senses of our souls 
and bodies, * ever releasing us from infirmities * and tribulations, * from the 
assaults of evil, ** and soul-corrupting pleasures. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
With faith I hasten to thy protection, * О pure Birthgiver of God. * Save me 
from perils and misfortunes, * from the confusion of the passions and the malice 
of the demons. * For, possessed of an abyss of mercy, * thou hast been shown to 
be a mediatress of salvation, * О Lady who hast given birth to the only merciful, * 
all-compassionate and abundantly kind-hearted God. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will hearken unto me * when I cry unto Him. 
Verse: When I called upon Thee, O God of my righteousness, Thou didst 
hearken unto me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VIII: 
The angels unceasingly hymn Thee, the King and Master; and I fall down 
before Thee, crying like the publican: Cleanse me, О God, and have mercy upon 
me! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
As thou art immortal, О my soul, let not the waves of life engulf thee, but rise 
up, crying out to thy Benefactor: Cleanse me, О God, and save me! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: О martyrs of the Lord, entreat ye our God, and ask for our 
souls a multitude of compassions and the cleansing of our many transgressions, 
we beseech you. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rejoice, thou praise of the universe! * Rejoice, temple of the Lord! * Rejoice, 
mountain overshadowed! * Rejoice, refuge of all! * Rejoice, golden candlestick! * 
Rejoice, honored glory of the Orthodox! * Rejoice, Mary, Mother of Christ God! * 
Rejoice, paradise! Rejoice, divine table! * Rejoice, tabernacle! Rejoice, golden jar! 
** Rejoice, thou hope of all!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
MONDAY NIGHT: TONE VIII 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto 
our God and Redeemer let us sing. 
We all know thee to be the Theotokos, a wellspring of the waters of prayer, 
gushing forth in streams upon the souls and bodies of the faithful; wherefore, we 
unceasingly glorify thee. 
In a manner transcending nature didst thou give birth to the Word Whose 
origin is in God (the Father), О Virgin, and hast thereby delivered nature from 
corruption; wherefore, free me from irrational and unnatural passions. 
Glory ..., Fields of carnal passions now surround me and grievously vex me; 
speedily visit thy servant, О Virgin, and save me from those who afflict me. 
Both now ..., He Who sustaineth, upholdeth and saveth all creation hath 
appeared, circumscribed, in thine arms, О pure one, and hath restored the race of 
mankind. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou 
art the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Quell thou the turmoil of the grievous affliction which now beset me, О most 
pure Lady, and free me from my transgressions and passions. 
Ineffable is the abyss of thy compassions, О most pure one. Thereby do thou 
deliver me from transgressions and infirmities. 
Glory ..., Haste thou, О most pure one, and visit me who am infirm, and 
deliver me from grievous illness and every sorrow. 
Both now ..., Magnify the mercy and aid of thy prayers upon me, О most pure 
one, and deliver me from perils and tribulations. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
О most pure one, ever show the remembrance of the saints and the cleansing 
of transgressions to be the purification of my heart. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Grant me salvation of soul and body, О most immaculate one; impart healing 
to me who am sick, and deliverance from evils. 
Glory ..., Set at naught the wiles of the evil demons and the uprisings of the 
passions, О most pure one, and grant strength to us who are sick. 
Both now ..., From thy womb hath the Sun of righteousness shone forth and 
illumined the world, О all-pure one. With His divine rays illumine me also. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
By thy birthgiving the bonds of death have been loosed and the might of 
corruption bound, О most holy and all-hymned Virgin; wherefore, quickly loose 
also the bonds of my transgressions and my heavy grief. 
Deliver me from the wickedness of the demons and the malice of men, О 
Lady, and quickly heal the sickness of my soul and body, О thou who alone hast 
given birth to the Savior and Lord, the Physician of spirits and all flesh. 
Glory ..., О most pure one, thee do I implore as the tongs which held the 
divine Coal: Utterly consume every passionate lust of thy servant and my grievous 
infirmities which are hard to bear, and do thou dry up the torrents of my grief. 
Both now ..., О all-pure Lady, thy Son hath given thee as salvation for all who 
believe in Him and proclaim Him to be God manifestly incarnate from thee; 
wherefore, save me from divers misfortunes and tribulations. 
ОDE VI 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and 
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Look upon me with thy merciful eye, О Lady, and quickly deliver me from 
cruel infirmities, from every affliction and fall which now awaiteth me. 
By thy supplications, О most pure Lady, deliver me from mindlessly 
passionate behavior, from unseemly jealousy, from, all evil and the oppression of 
life. 
Glory ..., He Who hath created us took form within thee, О Virgin, delivering 
human nature from corruption; wherefore, by thy prayers deliver me from the 
temptations which beset me, О pure one. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Both now ..., Thou wast shown to be the most pure temple of God Whom 
naught can contain, О most pure Lady. By thy prayers show me to be a temple of 
His grace, and preserve me unharmed. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
All we, the generations of mankind, * call thee blessed, * in that thou art the 
Virgin who alone among women * hast given birth without seed unto God in the 
flesh; * for the fire of the Godhead made its abode within thee, * and thou didst 
feed the Creator and Lord * with milk as an infant. * Wherefore, we, the race of 
mankind and of angels, * glorify thy birthgiving, * and together we cry out to thee: 
* Entreat Christ God to grant forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with faith 
worship thy most holy Offspring.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the 
Trinity, * as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
Grievous pangs have I found to be my reward, and, afflicted, I experience the 
pain of great illness; yet I entreat thee, О Theotokos: Help me, and quickly grant 
me health by thy prayers. 
О blessed Virgin, refuge of all the faithful who sorrow, rescue me from all 
temptation and grief, and from the malice of those who envy me, and deliver me 
from sins and divers ailments. 
Glory ..., О jar of beaten gold, from whence the life-creating Myrrh hath 
flowed forth upon the faithful: By thine aid, О pure Birthgiver of God, purge my 
soul and body of infirmities and the defilement of transgressions. 
Both now ..., Unceasingly glorifying the Word Who with the Father and the 
Spirit is equally without beginning, and Who was ineffably born from thee, О 
Mother of God, we chant in praise: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “Ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages”. 
All of us who in faith have recourse to thine aid proclaim the magnitude of thy 
divers miracles, О Lady. Save me now from cruel infirmity, from pangs of soul 
and body, and show me to be healthy, that I may glorify Christ thy Son 
throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Of a sudden the winds of those who envy me have blown and the rivers of the 
wicked have grievously smitten the house of my mind, О pure Virgin; but repel 
the assault of all griefs as it were that of the mindlessly raging sea, and by thy 
prayers grant me stillness throughout all ages. 
Glory ..., He Who fashioned the clay body of man and instilled therein an 
immortal soul, took form within thee, О Virgin, and restored it. By thy prayers 
render Him well and kindly disposed toward me, and grant strength and speedy 
deliverance to all who sorrow. 
Both now ..., Illumine with light those who ever glorify thee, О most pure one, 
for from thee shone forth the never-waning Light, and thou deliverest thy 
servants from the dark nocturnal treachery of the demons. Deliver me also from 
them, and by thy prayers save me from the evils which beset me. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do 
we magnify. 
Lift up the horn of the Church, О most pure one, grant might to the faithful 
over the heathen, and make firm the scepters of kingdoms. 
Bring low those who have been exalted, vanquish the alien hordes which 
attack us, О pure Virgin, and free thy servants unharmed by them, О maiden. 
Glory ..., О only champion of the Orthodox Christians who glorify thee, by 
thy prayers quickly put to shame the weapon-bearing Moslems. 
Both now ..., Grant understanding to the choirs of the faithful, О Virgin, 
strengthening them against enemies visible and invisible, and save them from all 
sorrow. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparia, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of repentance, in Tone VIII:  
Look upon my lowliness with Thy compassionate eye, О Lord, for my life will 
reach its end shortly, and there will be no salvation for me because of my works. 
Wherefore, I pray: Look upon my lowliness with Thy compassionate eye, О Lord, 
and save me! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
The Judge is coming! Take care, О my soul, and consider the hour of that 
dread day; for He is without mercy for those who have shown no mercy. 
Wherefore, before the end cry aloud: Have pity on me, О Savior, Who alone art 
sinless! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O ye faithful, with hymns let us magnify the Theotokos, * the unshakable 
confirmation of the Faith * and the precious gift of our souls: * Rejoice, thou who 
didst hold within thy womb the Stone of life! * Rejoice, thou hope of the ends of 
the earth * and aid of the sorrowful! ** Rejoice, thou Bride unwedded!  
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII: 
Like the harlot I fall down before Thee, that I may receive remission; and 
instead of myrrh I offer Thee tears from the depths of my heart, that Thou mayest 
take pity on me as Thou didst her, О Savior, and grant me cleansing of my sins: 
For like her I cry to Thee: Deliver me from the mire of my deeds! 
Verse: О Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 
My time on earth cometh to an end, my life hath passed by, and Thy dread 
judgment-seat is made ready, О Savior; the trial awaiteth me, threatening me with 
fiery torment, and unquenchable flame. Grant me a shower of tears and quench 
its power, О Thou Who desirest that all men should be saved. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Ye were shown to be noetic beacons, О holy martyrs, for by 
faith ye abolished the gloom of delusion, lit the lamps of our souls, and entered 
with glory into the heavenly bridal-chamber with the Bridegroom. Pray ye now, 
we beseech you, that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O most pure Virgin Mother of God, heal thou the grievous passions of my 
soul, I pray, and grant me forgiveness of the transgressions which I have 
committed, defiling my soul and body, wretch that I am. Woe is me! What shall I 
do at that hour when the angel will separate my soul from my passion-plagued 
body? Then be thou my helper and most fervent intercessor; for thee do I, thy 
servant, have as my hope.  
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Pondering what was mystically commanded ...”: 
Bringing to mind the day and hour of Thy dread, terrible and implacable 
tribunal, О Master Christ, I tremble like a malefactor. Shameful are the deeds and 
grievous the acts which I alone have diligently committed. Wherefore, I fall down 
before Thee with fear and cry out in pain: Through the supplications of Thy Fore-
runner save me, О greatly Merciful One! 
О my soul who art wasting thy life in negligence, arise now and lift thine eyes 
to repentance. Weep bitterly from the depths of thy heart, lest in the life to come 
thou lament in vain. Restrain thyself, considering the second coming of the 
Master, and before the judgment condemn thyself, that thou mayest then escape 
the righteous judgment. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
By the prayers of Thy bodiless ones, O Christ, * and the Forerunner, * of the 
disciples, prophets and martyrs, * of all Thy saints and venerable ones, * and of 
Thy blessed Mother, * we beseech Thee; grant us to walk in Thy light, * and deem 
us worthy to receive Thy Kingdom ** for the sake of Thy compassionate mercy. 
ODE I 
Canon of repentance to our Lord Jesus Christ and His holy martyrs, the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: To Him who crushed the enemy with His arm * and led Israel 
through the Red Sea, * to our Redeemer and our God let us sing, * for He 
hath been glorified. 
Fill my heart with compunction, О Christ, that with repentance I may enter 
Thy habitations, and with confession may pray to Thee Who dost release me from 
my debts. 
Loose me from the bonds of my countless evils, О Word, that in repentance I 
may walk in Thy righteous footsteps which lead me to the divine resting-place of 
eternal beauty. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
To the martyrs: The great magnificence of Thy martyrs is exalted to the 
highest, О Christ; for suffering all-gloriously, they were magnified by Thine 
exceedingly great grace. 
To the martyrs: By the sprinkling of the divine blood of the holy spiritual 
athletes the blood sacrificed to the enemy in pagan temples was staunched, and 
those on earth have been sanctified by the grace of the Spirit. 
Theotokion: Show me the paths of repentance, О Virgin, and turn me from 
the way that leadeth to sin, that I may sing to thee, the greatly hymned Mother of 
God. 
Another canon, of the holy forerunner, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Unto Him Who overthrew the tyranny of Pharaoh in the sea * and 
led Israel over dry land, * let us chant unto Christ our God, * for He hath 
been glorified throughout the ages. 
О Forerunner and preacher of repentance, entreat the Savior and Lord that I 
may repent with all my soul, and that He enlighten the mind and heart of me who 
honor thee with love. 
As a most comely lamb of the desert, О Forerunner and martyr of Christ, by 
thy divine prayer, guide me to the life of repentance, for I now abide in the desert 
of the passions. 
By thy mediation free me quickly from the sin which torments me, I pray, О 
Forerunner, and liberate me from the raging tempest of the demons. 
Theotokion: О Mother of the Truth, save me who am cruelly tempest-tossed 
and oft engulfed by the passions, and steer me to the right calm harbor of 
salvation. 
ODE III 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: My heart is established in the Lord, * my horn is exalted in my God, 
* my mouth is enlarged against mine enemies, * and I rejoice in Thy 
salvation. 
Having washed away the evil pollutions of my heart, О my Christ, in that 
Thou art good grant that I may appear blameless before Thee on the day of 
judgment. 
Through wickedness the apostate spirit was able to slay me with the sting of 
sin, О Word; but do Thou Thyself, О Christ, heal me with the life-bearing herb of 
repentance. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
To the martyrs: “Let us stand courageously,” the passion-bearers cried out one 
to another, “that no-one may desert the army. As an ally the Lord standeth before 
us who suffer with valiant mind.”  
To the martyrs: In hymns let us all honor the faithful martyrs of the Lord, the 
most precious stones of the Church, the divine pillars of piety. 
Theotokion: О Theotokos, the setting-aright of the fallen, from the pit of 
mine evils raise me up who have fallen, and set me firmly upon the rock of the 
commandments of God, О Lady. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: O Thou Who established the heavens by Thy word, * establish our 
mind and heart, * that we may hymn and glorify Thee * unto the salvation 
of our souls.  
Let fall upon me drops of repentance, О right glorious martyr and Forerunner 
of the Lord of all, who in the river baptized the Abyss of loving-kindness. 
Ever buffeted in mind by the perilous waves of life, I flee beneath thy 
protection, О Forerunner of the Savior. Make haste to help me, thy servant. 
In my prayers at night I call upon thee, the day-star of the world, О 
Forerunner blessed of God. Enlighten the senses of my heart. 
Theotokion: Accept this salutation from us, О holy Theotokos: Rejoice, thou 
who hast given birth to the Joy of the world! Rejoice, jar from whence the 
heavenly Manna hath been given to all the faithful! 
ODE IV 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee O Lord, * and I was afraid, * for thy 
counsel is ineffable, * being the ever-existent God, * Thou didst come forth 
from the Virgin, * wherefore I hymn Thee: * glory to thy condescension, O 
Christ, * glory to Thy power.  
The enemy deceiver beguiled me into sinfully tasting of the fruit, О good One, 
and exiled me far from Thee, and made me prey to his fangs. О only Savior, 
hasten Thou to rescue me! 
О Lord, Thou Thyself knowest the hidden and secret things of me who have 
sinned greatly against Thee. By thy many compassions have pity, О Word of God, 
and as Thou art full of tender compassion grant me a purifying time of 
repentance. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
To the martyrs: Overwhelmed by tortures as with waves, О martyrs, ye were 
guided by the steering of Christ to the havens of the kingdom of heaven, and are 
truly adorned by Him with crowns of victory. 
To the martyrs: Cultivating the ground of your hearts with piety, О martyrs, ye 
sowed upon it the seed of confession, and by grace manifestly reaped the comely 
Grain an hundredfold. 
Theotokion: О all-hymned Lady, with all joy fill thou the mind of me who sing 
aloud unto thee, granting me goodly tears, occasion for repentance, and an 
understanding of salvation. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
I weep for myself, for I ever live a life uncorrected. О Forerunner, save and 
have pity on me who am perishing in my sins. 
In thy supplications and prayers, О blessed one, may I find thee to be a helper 
strengthening my soul and illumining my mind. 
О Forerunner of the Savior, to the harbor of divine understanding steer me 
who am engulfed and imperiled by the tempest of my offenses. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, who hast given birth to Him Who raised up 
our abased nature, having humbled me who live in arrogance of mind, save me. 
ODE V 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Disperse, O Word, the darkness from my soul, * O Christ God, the 
Light-Giver, * Having driven out the primordial darkness of the abyss, * 
grant unto me the light of Thy commandments, * that early in the morning 
I may glorify Thee. 
О Creator of all, Who purified the harlot and the lepers by Thy command, 
cleanse Thou my lowly soul of defiling sin, and make it beautiful with garments of 
light, I pray, О Master. 
О Christ God, Who hast released me from the bonds of my many 
transgressions, guide me, that without hindrance I may walk Thy paths, that, 
parted from the flesh and dwelling in the holy mansions, I may glorify Thee. 
To the martyrs: Having woven for themselves robes of glory, and arrayed 
themselves beautifully therein, the martyrs dwell in joy in the kingdom on high, 
adorned with beautiful crowns of victory. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
To the martyrs: О wise martyrs, ye right wisely traded fleeting things for those 
which are permanent; for, beset by the afflictions of divers tortures, rejoicing, ye 
attained unto the true expanse of the kingdom of heaven. 
Theotokion: О holy Theotokos, who hast given birth in the flesh to the holy 
Word Who alone resteth in all the saints: Sanctify my mind, which ever remains 
mired in wicked deeds. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: Out of the night of ignorance * hath the day of divine knowledge 
dawned, * in the light O Christ, of Thy countenance. * May Thy praise 
shine forth in our hearts * like the light of the dawn.  
As the luminary of the Sun of righteousness, О glorious Forerunner, enlighten 
me who am astray in the night of life. 
At the trial to come, when I must stand before the Lord, may I find thee to be 
an intercessor, О Forerunner, rescuing me from dread condemnation. 
О ever-hymned one, on the rock of the will of God establish me who am 
imperiled and buffeted by the temptations of the demons. 
Theotokion: In that thou art higher than all creation, О Ever-virgin Mother of 
God, show me as one who eludes the snares of the enemy. 
ODE VI 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver the prophet from the depths * of the abyss, O 
Christ God, * so deliver me also from my sins, * O Lover of mankind, * and 
guide my life, I pray Thee.  
Accept me who repent, as once Thou didst the Ninevites who believed in the 
divine preaching of Thy prophet, О Christ, and guide Thou my life, I pray Thee. 
Drowning amid many transgressions, О Christ, I sigh like the publican, shed 
tears like the harlot, and like Peter cry aloud: Grant me a helping hand, and save 
me! 
To the martyrs: As beacons of divine radiance, О martyrs, with the rays of 
your suffering ye ever illumine the earthly world and drive away the deep darkness 
of delustion. 
To the martyrs: Having found a most blessed end, О all-holy martyrs, ye ever 
worship the blessed God, delighting in His effulgence. 
Theotokion: The jar containing manna once prefigured thee, О Theotokos; 
for thou didst bear Christ, Who hath rained the manna of understanding upon all 
who honor thee. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: O Thou that puttest on light as a garment * grant me also a robe of 
light, * O All-merciful Christ, our God. 
With the scythe of true repentance clear thou my whole heart, О most wise 
John, making it fertile with the virtues. 
Attacked by the sea-monster of perils, I cry to thee from the depths of my 
heart, О Forerunner: Free me from grievous pain! 
Repent with fervor, О my soul! Lo! the trial cometh! Rise up, crying aloud: О 
Jesus my God, for the sake of Thy Forerunner have pity on me! 
Theotokion: We pray thee, О pure one, who at thy word alone hast given birth 
in the flesh to the Word: Deliver our souls from the snares of the enemy. 
ODE VII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: By an angel didst Thou refresh the Children in the furnace * 
transforming the roaring flames into dew. * “O God of our fathers, blessed 
art Thou.” 
Conceived and born in iniquities, I have sinned more than all, О 
Compassionate One. Grant me the time to obtain justification. 
Like the Pharisee of old I have foolishly exalted myself, and have sustained a 
grievous fall; and seeing me, the adversary rejoiceth. О Word of God, disdain me 
not! 
To the martyrs: The council of the honored martyrs, the invincible army, the 
holy regiment, who were brave on earth, have been enrolled in the city of the 
heavens. 
To the martyrs: Having willingly passed through the suffering which winneth 
immortality, О martyrs, ye pour forth a stream of healings which driveth away our 
sufferings. 
Theotokion: In a surpassing manner thou hast given birth to the Cause of all, 
Who in the superabundance of His goodness became a man. Wherefore, together 
we call thee blessed, О pure one. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy word 
made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * O Lord 
God of our Fathers. 
О Forerunner, who prepared the ways of the Lord, guide thou my steps unto 
Him, that I may cry out: Blessed art Thou, О God of our fathers! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
О herald of the Light, enlighten my soul, and from cruel darkness and burning 
Gehenna deliver me who flee to thee with undoubting soul. 
As the fruitful offspring of a barren woman, О wise Baptizer of Christ, By thy 
prayers transform the barrenness of my heart to fruitfulness. 
Theotokion: О chosen ewe-lamb of the Word of God, entreat God Who 
became incarnate from thee, that at the dread hour He number me with His 
chosen sheep. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: O Thou who dost cover Thy chambers on high with the waters, * 
Thou Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and Who upholdest all 
things: * the sun doth sing Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * 
every creature offereth a hymn unto Thee, * as their Fashioner, throughout 
the ages. 
Thou hast defiled thy hands with all manner of wicked deeds, О my soul. How 
canst thou lift them up, and converse with God? And thy feet, which hasten to 
shameless deeds, thou hast rendered useless. Take care to walk the paths of 
salvation through repentance. 
I have never abode in Thy commandments, O good Lord, nor have I done 
Thy will for even a single day. What eyes can I raise to Thee Who rendereth just 
judgment and shalt send the guilty into the fire of Gehenna? 
To the martyrs: Ye extinguished the burning furnace of polytheism, О wise 
spiritual athletes, pouring forth your unjustly shed blood like water, out of love for 
the Creator; wherefore, ye have inherited a torrent of delight. 
To the martyrs: Enduring the severing of your hands and feet, ye transcended 
your lowly earthly bodies, as though it were others who were suffering, О holy 
ones; wherefore, ye have now forever been deemed worthy of life on high. 
Theotokion: Buffeted by the tempest of sin, I cry to thee, О pure Lady: By thy 
mediation steer me to saving repentance and the most calm haven, that I, who am 
ever darkened by sloth, may behold the light of salvation. 
Canon of the holy forerunner 
Irmos: The Beginningless King of glory, * before Whom tremble all the 
hosts of heaven, * ye priests hymn, and ye peoples * supremely exalt 
throughout all ages. 
О Baptist, entreat the Lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of the world, 
and Whom thou didst point out to all, that He slay my passions and save my soul. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Ease thou the burden of my soul and do battle against those who make war 
upon me, О Baptist of the Lord; and show me to be unscathed by their malice. 
Fleeing, thou didst withdraw and make thine abode in the trackless wilderness, 
О prophet; wherefore, I beseech thee: Quickly lay waste to the passions of my 
soul. 
Theotokion: О Virgin, thou art the vine which gave rise to the ripe Cluster, 
and now givest me the drink of compunction, taking away the drunkenness of 
mine evils. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of repentance 
Irmos: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, * Who hath exalted the horn of 
salvation on our behalf * in the house of His child David, * wherein the 
Dayspring from on high hath visited us, * and guided us on the path of 
peace.  
О Christ, mercifully regard me, whose shoulders have received many stripes, 
and heal them, pouring forth wine and oil upon them, that saved I may magnify 
with thanksgiving the understanding of Thy loving-kindness, О Savior. 
As Thou didst deliver from murder and evils the good thief who cried out to 
Thee, and as Thou didst have compassion upon the harlot who wept, have mercy 
upon me, the despairing, О Savior as Thou didst Thy great disciple Peter and 
David the prophet. 
To the martyrs: Conforming to the passions of Him Who suffered for our 
sake, О passion-bearers, with Him ye now send up glory together, deified by 
divine communion, resplendent with rays that outshine the material sun, 
enlightening the hearts of the faithful. 
To the martyrs: The virtue of the holy spiritual athletes hath shone forth, 
enriching every city with faith, for they possess them as treasures which cannot be 
taken away, and which abundantly emit the grace of most glorious miracles. Let us 
hymn them as our fervent intercessors. 
Theotokion: With the brilliant lightning-flashes of the Son of God Who issued 
forth from thy womb, О all-immaculate one, enlighten those who hymn thee with 
faith; and by thine intercession rescue us from the darkness devoid of light, and 
from everlasting torment. 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Canon of the holy forerunner  
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire of 
the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the 
salvation of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we magnify 
thee. 
When I must stand before Thy dread throne, О Word, and the penalty for my 
deeds will be assessed, what answer shall I give, wretch that I am? For the sake of 
Thy Baptist, О Lord my God, have pity on me then. 
As the voice of the Word, direct my cries unto God, О most wise Baptist, and 
deliver me from the evil of the demons and the temptations of men, that I may 
call thee blessed, as is meet. 
Nurture me with the immortal food of Christ’s commandments, and give me 
the drink of life to consume, О prophet and Forerunner; and present me who flee 
under thy protection, to stand before God saved. 
Theotokion: О pure and most glorious Virgin Lady, with the Forerunner 
entreat thy Son and King, that He save from all need those who with faith call 
thee blessed. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of repentance, in Tone VIII: 
When I bring to mind the multitude of the evils I have done, and come to 
consider the dread trial, seized with trembling I flee to Thee, the God Who is the 
Lover of mankind. Wherefore, disdain me not, I pray Thee, О only Sinless One; 
grant compunction to my lowly soul before the end, and save me. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Grant me tears as once Thou didst to the sinful woman, О God, and grant that 
I may wash the feet which have freed me from the path of delusion, and that I 
may offer Thee a pure life wrought for me by repentance, as myrrh of sweet 
savor, that even I may hear Thy longed-for voice saying: Thy faith hath saved 
thee. Go in peace! 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: Ye struggled greatly, О saints, valiantly enduring tortures at the 
hands of the iniquitous; and though ye have passed from this life, ye still work 
wonders in this world and heal those made sick by their passions. О holy ones, 
pray ye that our souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thy shelter, O Virgin Theotokos, * is spiritual healing; * for, having recourse 
unto it, ** we are delivered from spiritual infirmities.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON TUESDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VIII 
Remember us, О Christ, Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the 
thief on the tree; and grant unto all Thy heavenly kingdom, О only 
Compassionate One. 
As Thou dost possess an abyss of tender compassion, О Christ, dry up the 
abyss of my transgressions; and with tears of compunction transform my 
hardened soul. 
О divine Baptist who of old baptized Christ in water, by thine supplications 
impel me to the haven of repentance, for I am tempest-tossed by the threefold 
billows of the passions. 
To the martyrs: Having quenched the fire of the madness of idolatry with your 
blood, О holy passion-bearers, ye ever pour forth streams of healings, curing 
divers passions. 
Glory ..., О beginningless Father, Son and divine Spirit, through the 
supplications of the Baptist ease the chronic sufferings of my soul, I pray, and 
save me, Thy servant. 
Both now ..., By thy supplications, О most pure Theotokos, from the disgrace 
of the passions and cruel torment in Hades deliver us who piously call thee 
blessed. 
 
On Tuesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: The righteous man shall be glad in the Lord * 
and shall hope in Him.  
Verse: Hearken, O God, unto my prayer, when I pray unto Thee.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous man shall flourish like a palm tree, and 
like a cedar in Lebanon shall he be multiplied.  
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of our 
God they shall blossom forth.  
 
Communion Verse: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he 
shall not be afraid of evil tidings.  
  
