--- PAGE 1 ---
ON TUESDAY EVENING: TONE VIII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “The martyrs of the Lord ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
When Thou wast nailed to the Cross, Thy hands and feet run through, Thy 
holy side was pierced, pouring forth drops of blood and water, our divine 
salvation, O supremely good One, that Thou mightest wash away my defilement 
and pollution. Glory to Thy goodness, О all-Compassionate One! 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Thou didst endure suffering, О Master, that Thou mightest bestow dispassion 
upon all who worship Thy sufferings and voluntary sacrifice: the spear, nails and 
reed, which Thou didst willingly endure with long-suffering: that for the sake of 
Thy sufferings, О Lord, Thou mightest win dispassion for me. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock willingly lifted up upon the 
Tree, cried out with compunction, lamenting: “Woe is me, О my most beloved 
Child! How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded Thee, desiring to 
leave me bereft of Thee, О all-Beloved!” 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
“I cannot bear to see Thee Who givest wakefulness to all, asleep upon the 
Tree, that Thou mightest give divine and saving watchfulness to those who have 
fallen into pernicious sleep through the fruit of disobedience!”, said the Virgin, 
whom we magnify, weeping. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
“The unrighteous council lifted Thee the Lamb Who taketh away the sins of 
the world up upon the Cross, and they pierced Thy side with a spear, and ran Thy 
hands and feet through with nails, О Long- suffering One. О the wicked savagery! 
О the audacity!”, cried the most pure one, weeping with compunction. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
“What is this thing that I now behold, О Master? Thou Who most wondrously 
holdeth all creation in the palm of Thy hand art suspended unjustly upon the Tree 
as a lamb, О Word of God, hung there by disobedient servants. О the patience! О 
Thy goodness, О Compassionate One!”, the most immaculate one said, weeping. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: When the most pure one beheld Thee led to the slaughter, * 
following Thee with tears she cried aloud: * Whither hast Thou gone, O my Son,? 
* I can no longer bear not beholding Thee ** O my abundantly merciful Jesus.' 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: Thy mercy, O Lord, shall pursue me * all the days of my life. 
Verse: The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want. In a place of green 
pasture, there hath He made me to dwell. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VIII: 
О Christ God Who wast lifted up upon the Cross, Thou didst save the race of 
mankind. We glorify Thy sufferings! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Thou wast nailed to the Cross, О Christ God, and opened the gates of 
paradise. We glorify Thy divinity! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them, that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Thy martyrs, О Lord, putting aside the things of life, ignored 
their tortures for the sake of the life which is to come, and were shown to be 
inheritors thereof; wherefore, they rejoice with the angels. By their supplications 
grant great mercy to Thy people. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, though Thou didst stand forth before the tribunal ...”: 
Stavrotheotokion: O Lord, when the sun beheld Thee * the Sun of 
righteousness, hanging upon the Tree, * it hid its rays, and the light of the moon 
was changed to darkness; * and Thine all-immaculate Mother ** was pierced in 
the depths of her soul. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ON TUESDAY NIGHT: TONE VIII 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto 
our God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Beset by many perils, I flee unto thee, seeking salvation. О Virgin Mother of 
the Word, save me from every grievous and cruel circumstance. 
Assaults of the passions disquiet me and fill my soul with great despondency. 
Bring peace to me with the tranquility of thy Son and God, О all-immaculate 
maiden. 
Glory ..., I entreat thee, О Virgin who hast given birth to God the Savior, that 
I may be delivered from grievous circumstances; for, fleeing now unto thee, I raise 
unto thee my soul and mind. 
Both now ..., In that thou art good, О only Mother of God who hast given 
birth to Him Who is good, unto me who am sick in body and soul grant divine 
visitation and providence. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, 
* do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of 
the faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
I count thee the intercession and protection of my life, О Virgin Birthgiver of 
God. Guide me to thy haven, О cause of good things, confirmation of the 
faithful, who alone art all-hymned. 
I beg thee to quell the tumult of my soul and the tempest of my grief, О 
Virgin; for thou hast given birth to Christ, the Origin of tranquility, О Bride of 
God who alone art most pure. 
Glory ..., О thou who hast given birth unto the Benefactor, the Cause of good 
things, pour forth the riches of beneficence upon all; for as thou hast given birth 
to Christ Who is mighty in strength, thou art able to accomplish all things, О thou 
who art blessed of God. 
Both now ..., When I am wracked by cruel afflictions and painful sufferings, О 
Virgin, do thou help me; for I know thee to be an inexhaustible and never-failing 
treasury of healings, О most immaculate one. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
О Bride of God, who hast given birth to the Lord and Helmsman, still thou 
the tumult of my passions and the tempest of my transgressions. 
О thou who hast given birth to the compassionate Savior of all who hymn 
thee, bestow the abyss of thy tender compassion upon me who invoke thee. 
Glory ..., Delighting in thy gifts, О most pure one, we chant hymnody of 
thanksgiving unto thee, knowing thee to be the Mother of God. 
Both now ..., As I lie upon my bed of sickness and infirmity, help me, О only 
Ever- virgin Theotokos, in that thou art full of love. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine 
arm raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
Fill thou my heart with gladness, О pure one, granting me thine unfading joy, 
О thou who hast given birth to the Cause of gladness. 
Deliver us from misfortunes, О pure Theotokos, who hast given birth to 
eternal Deliverance, the Intelligence which passeth all understanding. 
Glory ..., Dispel thou the gloom of my transgressions with the radiance of thy 
splendor, О Bride of God who hast given birth to the divine and pre-eternal 
Light. 
Both now ..., О pure one, heal thou the sickness of my soul, granting me thy 
visitation, and By thy prayers giving me health. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I 
proclaim my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto 
Hades hath drawn nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up 
from corruption, O God. 
He Who gave Himself over to death hath saved from death and corruption 
my nature which hath been held captive by corruption, О Virgin. Entreat thy Lord 
and Son, that He deliver me from the wickedness of the enemy. 
I know thee to be the intercessor and steadfast guardian of my life who doeth 
away with the tumults of temptations and repelleth the onslaughts of the demons; 
and I ever pray to be delivered from the corruption of my passions. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., О maiden, we have acquired thee as a bulwark of refuge, the perfect 
salvation of our souls, and latitude amid tribulations; and we ever rejoice in thy 
splendor. О Lady, even now save us from sufferings and misfortunes. 
Both now ..., I lie now, sick, upon my bed, and there is no healing for my 
flesh; but to thee, the good one who gave birth to God, the Savior and Redeemer 
of the world, do I pray: Raise me up from the corruption of infirmities. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Beholding Thee, the Lamb and Shepherd, * the Savior of the world, upon the 
Cross, * she that gaveth birth to Thee said, weeping: * The world rejoiceth, having 
received deliverance; * but my womb doth burn, beholding Thy crucifixion, ** 
which Thou dost endure on behalf of all, O my Son and God! 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the 
Trinity, * as they sang: 'O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.' 
As Thou didst desire to arrange our salvation, О Savior, Thou madest Thine 
abode within the womb of the Virgin, and hast shown her to be an intercessor for 
the world. О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Thou hast given birth to Him Who willeth mercy, О pure Mother. Him do 
thou beseech, that He deliver from transgressions and defilement of soul those 
who cry out with faith: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Glory ..., Thou hast shown her who gave birth to Thee to be a treasury of 
salvation, a wellspring of incorruption, a tower of safety and a portal of 
repentance for those who cry: О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Both now ..., О Virgin Birthgiver of God who hast given birth for us to Christ 
the Savior, grant healing of bodily weakness and infirmity of soul unto those who 
with love have recourse to thy protection. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let 
us praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
О Virgin, disdain not those who are in need of thine aid, and who hymn and 
supremely exalt thee throughout all ages. 
Thou healest, the infirmity of my soul and my bodily pangs, О pure Virgin, 
that I may glorify thee throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., О Virgin, thou pourest forth a wealth of healings upon those who 
with faith hymn thee and supremely exalt thine ineffable offspring. 
Both now ..., О Virgin, thou drivest away the assaults of temptations and the 
attacks of the passions; wherefore, we hymn thee throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do 
we magnify. 
Turn not away from the torrent of my tears, О Virgin who hast given birth 
unto Christ, and wiped away every tear from every face. 
Fill thou my heart with joy, О Virgin who received the fullness of Joy, setting 
at naught the grief of sin. 
Glory ..., With the rays of thy light, О Virgin, illumine those who in an 
Orthodox manner confess thee to be the Theotokos, dispelling the darkness of 
ignorance. 
Both now ..., Heal thou the infirmities of one who hath been brought down to 
a place of affliction, О Virgin, transforming illness into health. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VIII: 
Beholding the Author of life hanging upon the Cross, the thief said: “If Thou, 
Who art crucified with us, hadst not become God incarnate, the sun would not 
have lost its brightness and the earth would not have quaked with trembling. 
Remember me, О Lord, in Thy kingdom!” 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet, 
for He is holy. 
Thy Cross is found to be a scale weighing the two thieves; for the one was 
brought down to Hades by the burden of his blasphemy, while the other was 
borne up out of transgressions to the knowledge of theology. О Christ God, glory 
be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Beholding the Lamb, Shepherd and Redeemer unjustly 
lifted up upon the Cross, the Ewe- lamb cried out, bitterly weeping: “The world 
rejoiceth, receiving deliverance through Thee; but my womb doth burn as I 
behold the crucifixion Thou dost endure in the tender compassion of Thy mercy, 
О supremely good God, О sinless Lord!” Wherefore, we cry out to her with faith: 
Show thou compassion to us, О Virgin, and grant remission offenses unto those 
who worship His sufferings. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII: 
The tree in the midst of Eden blossomed forth death, but the Tree in the 
midst of the whole world hath produced life; for they who of old tasted the fruit, 
while incorrupt, became corrupt, but those who have obtained the latter have 
inherited incorruption. For by the Cross Thou savest the race of mankind, in that 
Thou art God. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
In paradise of old the tree stripped me naked, and by my tasting the enemy 
brought mortality upon me; but when the tree of the Cross was planted in the 
ground, it brought forth the raiment of life everlasting, and filled the whole world 
with all joy. Beholding it uplifted, О ye people, with faith let us cry out together to 
God: Thy house is full of glory! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
To the martyrs: Through faith ye were shown to be ever-radiant beacons for 
the whole world; and placing all your martyric faith in God, with the noetic oil of 
the Holy Spirit ye fed the lamps of your souls. Wherefore, ye have been revealed 
to the Church as noetic cups pouring forth healings like water upon all, О all-
praised passion-bearers. Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who with love celebrate your holy memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: О Virgin, when thou didst behold Him Who became 
incarnate from thee lifted up upon the Cross in the midst of two thieves, 
overcome with weeping, thou didst cry aloud: “Woe is me, О my most sweet 
Child! How is it that Thou Who, in that Thou art compassionate, takest away the 
sins of the world art willingly crucified, desiring, as God, that the hymnody of 
mortals be offered to Thee in praise?” 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Pondering what was mystically commanded ...”: 
Beholding Thee, О Christ, the never-setting Sun, lifted up upon the Cross, the 
sun straightway dimmed its rays in fear, the earth quaked, the rocks split asunder 
with trembling, the veil of the temple was rent in twain, and the dead arose from 
the graves, glorifying the awesome and divine condescension of our one God. 
The tree in Eden once gave rise to bitterness, but the tree of the Cross hath 
blossomed forth sweet life; for Adam, eating, fell headlong into corruption, but 
we, enjoying the fruit of Christ, are enlivened and mystically deified, receiving the 
eternal kingdom of God. Wherefore, we cry out with faith: Glory to Thy 
sufferings, О Word. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Ever protected by the Cross of thy Son and God, O Virgin, 
we vanquish the assaults and wiles of the demons, hymning thee who art truly the 
Theotokos; and all generations bless thee with love, O most pure one, as thou 
didst foretell. Wherefore, by thy supplications grant us forgiveness of sins.  
ODE I 
Canon of the precious and life-creating Cross, the acrostic whereof is, 
“Grace be to God, Who was nailed to the Tree,” the composition of 
Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea 
in the figure of a cross, * once drowned pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * 
while it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a 
hymn unto God. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
О Word, having died on the Cross, Thou hast given life to me who was slain 
by the tree through pleasing food, and thereby adorned me with glory. I worship 
Thy dominion, glorifying Thy sufferings and infinite tender compassion. 
When the uncultivated Grape hung upon the Tree, He exuded for us the wine 
of divine grace which gladdeneth our hearts, wholly doing away with the 
drunkenness of error, and washing away sins. 
To the martyrs: Arrayed in wounds and adorned with the pangs of your 
sufferings, О great martyrs, ye stood with glory before the beneficent Master, 
rejoicing most gloriously, recognized as godlike. 
To the martyrs: Manifestly strengthened by divine power, ye manfully cast 
down all the pernicious power of the mighty one; and beautifully invested with 
crowns of victory, ye stand before God, rejoicing. 
Theotokion: Standing before Thy Cross, О Lord, she who knew not wedlock, 
beholding Thy wounds, О Master, was wounded, and said: “Woe is me, О my 
Child! I escaped pain at Thy birth but am now rent apart by pain!” 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
In thee, О Virgin, I have placed my hope of salvation. Wash me clean of all 
the filth of sin and make me pure, that I may act and be well-pleasing to thy Son 
and God and His all-holy name. 
О portal of the Light, enlighten mine eyes which the gloomy serpent hath 
enshrouded with the darkness of transgressions. Open unto me the doors of 
repentance, О Virgin; guide me to life, and rescue me from the flame and 
darkness. 
As thou hast boldness before Him Who was born from thee: the only-
begotten Word Who with the Father is without beginning: pray thou, О all-
immaculate one, that He deliver my soul from the oppression of the demons, 
from fire and every torment. 
О blessed and most pure Bride of God, blessed is the Fruit of thy womb 
whereby all of us mortals have been delivered from the curse: an ineffable 
wonder, incomprehensible knowledge, the salvation of all the faithful! 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou Who 
in the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and 
didst establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save 
Thee, O only Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О Thou Who established the heavens, Who set the foundations of the earth 
and set the boundaries of the sea by Thy word, Thou wast bound for my sake and 
nailed to the Cross, that Thou mightest release me from the bonds of sin, О 
Lover of mankind. 
Hurling himself against the tree of the Cross, the enemy and his pernicious 
demons were slain; he who was condemned for wickedly eating hath found mercy; 
and creation hath been made steadfast by the confirmation of piety. 
To the martyrs: The godly and valiant spiritual athletes had their naked bodies 
subjected to all manner of wounds, sharp blades, and wild beasts by the wicked 
persecutors; but, protected by God’s hand, they remained undaunted. 
To the martyrs: Looking in thought with watchful mind toward things to 
come, the glorious martyrs of Christ utterly spurned transitory things; wherefore, 
rejoicing, they endured unbearable wounds. 
Theotokion: The greatly hymned Ewe-lamb, beholding the Lamb unjustly 
lifted up upon the Tree, cried out, weeping and shedding maternal tears. And she 
hymned and glorified His long-suffering. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou 
art the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
All my desire is directed toward thee, О pure Lady: quickly free me of carnal 
desires. 
О Lady, portal of the Light, shine upon me the pure rays of repentance, and 
dispel the gloom of my sins. 
О only all-immaculate one, deliver us from every lust, from the temptations 
which assail us, and everlasting fire. 
Haste thou, О most pure one, to visit me who am sick, and deliver me from 
grievous wounds and every affliction. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art 
my God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom 
of Thy Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the prophet 
Habbakuk I cry unto Thee, * “Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!” 
The race of mankind hath been recalled from the fall which the first-formed 
man suffered of old; for the Creator of all was lifted up upon the Tree, His fingers 
bloody, His hands run through with nails of His own will, His side pierced by a 
spear. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
When the Cross was set up, all deceit was felled; when Thy garments, О 
Savior, were removed, the alien one was stripped naked, and Adam was arrayed in 
a robe of divine incorruption. Creation was enlightened when Thou wast crucified 
on the Tree, О Christ, and the sun dimmed its rays. 
To the martyrs: Like sheep, О martyrs, ye offered yourselves to the 
slaughtered Word as a new sacrifice; and drying up the sea of falsehood with 
streams of blood and divine grace, ever halting the outflow of the passions with 
the rain of miracles, О glorious ones. 
To the martyrs: Ye endured the mutilation of all your members, О martyrs: the 
uprooting of your teeth and nails, the pitiless amputation of your hands, tongues, 
feet and bodily extremities: wherefore, ye have been deemed worthy of the 
greatest glory, and stand before the God of all. 
Theotokion: Seeing her Bullock lifted up upon the Tree, the unblemished 
heifer cried out, exclaiming: “O my Child, how hath the assembly of the iniquitous 
failed to have pity on Thee Who had pity on them, but instead by a deceitful plot 
they unjustly willed to murder Thee?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
With light illumine my soul, which hath been darkened by transgressions, О 
Ever-virgin, for thou hast given birth to the Sun of righteousness. 
Rescue me from temptations and the soul-destroying tempest of life, О Bride 
of God, and free me from everlasting fire. 
О sacred vessel of virginity, habitation of Him Who by nature is 
uncontainable: Enlighten my soul, which hath been darkened by many passions. 
О all-holy Bride of God, Sovereign Lady of the world: Save me, delivering me 
from misfortunes and dispelling the tumult of the passions. 
ODE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
That Thou mightest deliver me from the beguiling taste (of the fruit), Thou 
didst deign to taste gall, О Long-suffering One; and that Thou mightest strip me 
of the mortality of the passions, О Jesus, Thou didst will to be nailed, naked, to 
the Tree. I hymn Thy loving-kindness! 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Making new my soul, which had been corrupted by the passions, О Word, 
Thou didst commit Thy soul to the Father, whilst hanging on the Tree. Perceiving 
this, the inanimate earth could not bear it, but quaked in fear, hymning Thee. 
To the martyrs: Arrayed in divine sufferings, having followed in the steps of 
Him Who by His sufferings hath granted dispassion unto all: the only-begotten 
Word of the beginningless Father: ye were adorned, О martyrs; wherefore, ye are 
glorified with Him. 
To the martyrs: Having rejected things below, ye inherited invisible things, 
making your abode in the divine habitations of heaven, immaterially deified by 
divine communion, О invincible martyrs of the Savior. 
Theotokion: “A strange sight do I see,” the all-hymned one cried; “How hast 
Thou, at the sight of Whom the whole earth doth quake, fallen asleep lifted up 
upon the Tree, desiring to wake those asleep from all ages? I bow down before 
Thy long-suffering, О my Son!” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our 
God, * and we know none other besides Thee. 
We hymn thee, О all-hymned and most immaculate Virgin, who contained the 
Word of God in thy womb. 
As thou hast the power to spare and to cure, deliver me from the 
unquenchable fire and the worm, О Mother of God. 
Thou art the bulwark and might of the faithful, О all-holy one, from 
temptations saving those who hymn thee. 
Heal thou mine ailing soul, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to the 
Salvation of all Who taketh away our infirmities. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * 
disquieten me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but 
do Thou stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * 
and save me, O my Guide.  
All the hosts of heaven sang and were amazed, seeing Thee hanging upon the 
Cross, О Word, for by Thy wounds Thou didst heal wounded Adam, and the 
curse hath been annulled 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Mankind was released from unbreakable bonds when Thou wast bound in the 
flesh, О Word; and the tyrant is bound like a bird, reviled by all the faithful. Glory 
to Thy tender compassion, О Christ! 
To the martyrs: Ye were shown to be like burning coals consuming all the 
tinder of ungodliness with grace, О godly passion-bearers, for seared on burning 
coals of fire, ye received divine coolness. 
To the martyrs: As sheep of the true Shepherd, ye remained unharmed even in 
the midst of wild wolves, О passion-bearers; and having finished your race well, О 
divine ones, ye now dwell in the fold of heaven. 
Theotokion: “I gave birth to Thee, the Lord of my life, Who art comely in 
beauty more than the sons of men,” the Virgin cried out; “How dost Thou now 
die crucified, bereft of beauty, О my Son Who by Thy hand didst make all 
beautiful?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and 
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
О Mary, pure and most honorable habitation of the Creator of all, grant me 
tears to purify my soul, and rescue me from the judgment and torment to come. 
О Theotokos, thou gate of God, reveal to my lowly soul the divine entry, that 
entering therein with confession, I may receive remission of mine evil deeds. 
My mind is tempest-tossed in the deep of sins amid the waves of despair. 
Have pity, О Lady, extend thy hand to me, and save me, О thou who hast given 
birth to the Savior. 
Amid the depths of evils, ever beset by turmoil and tribulations, all of us, the 
faithful, have thee as an intercessor and support, О Theotokos, thou only refuge 
of the faithful. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * 
for which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in 
a meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
The hands wherewith Thou didst work wonders were wounded, О Christ; and 
Thou didst endure wounds, healing all my wounds. О only Long-suffering One, I 
hymn Thee, crying out: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Crucified, Thy hands and feet were run through with nails, and Thy side, 
pierced, poured forth drops of remission upon all who unceasingly chant and say: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
To the martyrs: Let us form a choir, hymning the martyrs of God, who are 
numbered with the angelic choirs, enlighten those on earth, who ever chant: 
Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
To the martyrs: Sanctified, ye have come to dwell amid the splendors of the 
saints, О divine martyrs, sending down upon all who praise you, sanctification and 
deliverance; wherefore they sing unto Christ: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
Theotokion: “O never-setting Sun, how hast Thou set, crucified on the Tree?”, 
the Virgin cried out to Thee, О Word; “The sun, seeing this, hath halted in its 
circuit, unable to shine when Thou art suffering, О Master. I hymn Thine 
innocence, О my Son!” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.  
I beseech thee, О most pure Virgin: Slay the sin which liveth in me, grant that 
I may receive life, and deliver me from the lot of those who are tormented in the 
life to come. 
Divers passions disquiet me, О pure one who hast given birth to the Source of 
dispassion. By thy prayers О Theotokos, deliver me from their oppression and 
from everlasting fire. 
I sin of mine own free will, and, enslaved to unseemly habits, I flee now to thy 
customary mercy. Save me who am despairing, О all-holy Theotokos. 
Quench thou the flame of my passions, and still the tempest of my heart, О 
pure Mother of God; and deliver me from the tyranny of the demons and from 
everlasting fire, О most pure one. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “Ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages”. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Thou didst spring forth, incarnate, from the root of Jesse, and, wearing the 
crown of thorns, uprooted the burgeoning thorns of Adam’s crime. Nailed to the 
Tree, Thou hast healed the curse which sprang forth from a tree, and saving those 
who chant: Hymn О ye priests! Supremely exalt Him O ye people, throughout all 
ages! 
That Thou mightest make man god, Thou didst become man, О Lover of 
mankind; and affixed to the Cross, Thou wast pierced in the side and given 
vinegar and gall to drink. But saved by Thy sufferings, О Word, we cry out in 
thanksgiving: О ye priests! Supremely exalt Him O ye people, throughout all ages! 
To the martyrs: Bound, and slaughtered like lambs, mercilessly roasted in the 
fire, cast to the wild beasts, your heads cut off, ye rejoiced with indescribable joy, 
О martyrs, crying out: Ye children, bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, exalt Christ 
supremely forever! 
To the martyrs: О crowned martyrs, companions of the angels, who trampled 
the incorporeal foe underfoot: make entreaty for us to the Lord, that we may live 
in love and great oneness of mind, crying out with unwavering heart: Ye children 
bless; ye priests hymn; ye people, supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages! 
Theotokion: Groaning with pain, thou didst cry out maternally; and unable to 
bear the turmoil in thy womb, thou didst look upon Him Who was born from thy 
womb hanging upon the Cross, and didst cry out: “What is this sight, О my Child? 
How is it that Thou sufferest, Who art by nature dispassionate, desiring in every 
way to free the race of mankind from the passions?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The King of heaven, * Who is glorified by the hosts of angels, * let 
us praise and supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
О Virgin Birthgiver of God, ease thou the burden of my sins and 
transgressions, that I may magnify thee. 
О pure one, who hast given birth to God the Judge, by thine appeasing 
supplications show Him to be merciful unto me, that He may deliver me, from 
everlasting fire. 
My many transgressions have increased, О Theotokos. Grant me now a 
helping hand, and deliver me, the useless one, from the ever-burning flame. 
О most pure one, I pray thee: Enlighten the eyes of my heart, which have been 
blinded by the blackness of sin; and show them to be receptive to divine radiance, 
that for thy sake I may be shown to be pure for thy Son. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were 
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy 
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the 
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
With Thy wounded and blood-stained hands Thou didst heal my wounds, О 
Master and Lord, in that Thou art good; and Thou didst show me how to walk the 
paths of salvation, Thy feet affixed to the Cross - those feet at the sight of which, 
our first parents of old they hid themselves when they beheld Thee walking in 
paradise. 
When Thou wast set upright on the Cross, the first-formed man, who had 
suffered a great fall, was set aright, all the might of the enemy fell, and the whole 
earth was sanctified by the blood and water which flowed from Thy side. 
Wherefore, we magnify Thee unceasingly, О most Compassionate One. 
To the martyrs: Bound, О holy martyrs, ye loosed the bonds of the evil one, 
and with the bonds which ye patiently endured ye bound him and set him under 
your feet, full of shame, and by divine grace made him a mockery for those who 
saw him. 
To the martyrs: By the deposition of the sacred relics of the martyrs the earth 
hath been sanctified; for having acquired them as a divine wellspring, they pour 
forth all manner of healings, unceasingly healing the passions of soul and body, 
and with divine grace annulling the bane of the demons. 
Theotokion: Having escaped maternal pangs when I gave birth to Thee, О 
Long-suffering One, I now suffer pangs in my womb, and my soul is filled with 
pain, as Thou now willingly partakest of suffering, and dost accept pain!”, cried 
the most pure one, whom we magnify as is meet. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos  
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, 
* for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming 
man in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most 
pure Theotokos. 
Take pity on my wretched soul, О most pure one, mortify my destructive 
passions, and dispel the perplexity which torments me; and grant me holy and 
ever-vivifying streams of tears, whereby I may be delivered from the grievous 
condemnation which awaits me. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
О pure Virgin Bride of God, thou art a bulwark for Christians and a safe 
refuge for the world, wherein we are saved; for God, having become incarnate 
from thee, hath given thee to all as a saving protection. Wherefore, save me who 
am unworthy, О pure one. 
“O my Son, beginningless Word of the Father, Who art co-enthroned with the 
Holy Spirit, how is it that Thou hast stretched out Thy most precious feet upon 
the Cross? What is this great abasement, О supremely good One?”, the all-
immaculate one cried out, standing before Thee as Thou wast crucified. 
О thou who hast given birth to the Sweetness of all, letting drops of divine 
sweetness fall, sweeten my soul, which hath been made bitter by the venom of the 
serpent, О sure intercessor of the faithful, ever estranging me to bitter sin by thy 
mediation. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VIII: 
The staff of Moses prefigured Thy precious Cross, О our Savior; for thereby 
Thou didst save Thy people from the depths of the sea, О Lover of mankind. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Of old the Garden of Eden put forth in its midst the tree whose fruit was 
eaten; but Thy Church, О Christ, hath caused the Cross to spring forth, pouring 
out life upon the world. The one brought death upon Adam, who ate of its fruit, 
but the other gave life to the thief, who was saved by faith. О Christ God, Who by 
Thy suffering didst break the snares laid for us by the enemy, show us to share in 
his salvation, and grant us Thy kingdom, О Lord. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: О invincible martyrs of Christ, having vanquished error with 
the power of the Cross, ye received the grace of eternal life; and undaunted by the 
threats of the tyrants, ye rejoiced as ye were wounded with tortures: and your 
blood hath now become healing for our souls. Pray ye, that our souls be saved. 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee hanging upon the Cross, О Lord, the pure 
one who gave birth to Thee, standing nearby, said, weeping: “O my Child, why 
dost Thou suffer these things in the flesh and hasten to leave me childless? Hasten 
Thou, and glorify Thyself, that I may be magnified by Thy suffering!” 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON WEDNESDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
Remember us, О Christ, Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the 
thief on the tree; and grant unto all Thy heavenly kingdom, О only 
Compassionate One. 
Forming a cross with his staff, Moses parted the deep and led the people of 
Israel across; and we, making the sign thereof, vanquish the noetic foe. 
Jacob of old, blessing the children, the sons of his sons, crossed his arms as he 
extended them, making the sign of Thy Cross, whereby all of us have been freed 
from the curse, О Christ our Savior. 
To the martyrs: Emulating the sufferings of Christ, О passion-bearers, ye 
manfully endured bitter torments; and crowned with wreaths of incorruption, ye 
live in the heavens. 
Glory ..., Glory to the one immortal Father! Glory to the Son, Who liveth 
forever! Glory also to the all-holy Spirit, Who sanctifieth all creation! 
Both now ..., From thy virgin womb the Creator of the sun and moon shone 
forth, О pure one; and beholding Him hanging upon the Tree, all creation 
trembled. 
 
On Wednesday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon, the hymn of the Theotokos, in Tone III: My soul doth 
magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Savior.  
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear.  
Verse: The rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance.  
 
Communion Verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the 
name of the Lord.  
  
