--- PAGE 1 ---
ON WEDNESDAY EVENING: TONE VIII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O Lord, though Thou didst stand ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
О Lord, Thou didst enlighten Thine apostles with the beams of the 
Comforter, with the noetic radiance of the knowledge of Thee setting them as 
beacons unto the confirmation of the Faith, О Master; wherefore, we bow down 
before Thine ineffable love for mankind. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
By the supplications of Thine apostles, О Lord, Thou hast protected this Thy 
flock, preserving it unharmed by the temptations of the enemy; for with Thy 
precious blood Thou didst redeem it from enslavement to the enemy, in that 
Thou art compassionate and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Together ye were shown to be like precious stones set in the foundation of the 
Church, with radiant brilliance shining forth upon the whole world the knowledge 
of God, О divine apostles, who stand before the Trinity and pray for our souls. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О Lord, Thou hast glorified thine honored and holy hierarch Nicholas to the 
ends of the earth, imparting to him the grace of miracles; and Thou didst show 
him to be the champion of those in grievous misfortunes, and those who have 
fallen into tribulations and afflictions, and who ever ask his help. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
О Lord, have pity on Thy servants through the divine entreaties of Thy holy 
hierarch, and free us from all misfortune, all affliction, and every attack, for with 
faith do we bow down before Thine invincible might. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Having thee as an intercessor and fervent ally before the Master, О Nicholas, 
we flee to thee with faith, and cry: Turn us not away empty of thy protection, but 
show that thy loving-kindness extends to thy servants. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Behold the groaning of my contrite heart, * O Bride of God, * and accept, and 
reject not, the lifting up of my hands, * O pure and all-immaculate Virgin Mary, * 
as thou art full of love for mankind; ** that I may hymn and magnify thee who 
hast exalted our race.  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII: 
Fervently loving Thee on earth, О Lord, Thine apostles considered all to be 
but dung, that they might acquire Thee alone; and they gave their bodies over to 
wounds for Thee; wherefore, glorified, they pray for our souls. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven, Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
О Lord, Thou didst magnify the memory of the apostles on earth, for 
assembling them together, we all glorify Thee; since by their prayers and for their 
sake, Thou dost grant healings, peace and great mercy to the whole world. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: What virtue, what praise is due the saints? For they bowed 
their heads beneath the sword for the sake of Thee Who bowed down the 
heavens and descended; they shed their blood for Thee Who emptied Thyself and 
assumed the form of a servant; they humbled themselves even unto death, emulat-
ing Thy poverty. By their prayers, О God, have mercy upon us in the multitude of 
Thy compassions. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
I flee to thy protection, O holy Virgin Theotokos, * for I know that through 
thee I shall obtain salvation; ** for thou art able to help me, O pure one.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ON WEDNESDAY NIGHT: TONE VIII 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea 
in the figure of a cross, * once drowned pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * 
while it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a 
hymn unto God. 
In a manner transcending nature, О Virgin Theotokos, thou hast given birth 
to God the Word incarnate, Who before was incorporeal, yet came to dwell in the 
world as God and man; wherefore, we all glorify thee who, after God, art our sure 
help. 
Arrayed in a vesture of many colors, О blessed one who art full of the grace of 
God, in a manner transcending understanding and all telling thou hast given birth 
to the Word of the Father, Who became flesh in His ineffable loving-kindness; 
and thou didst remain an undefiled virgin. 
Glory ..., From a royal root thou didst put forth Christ the King, the Word of 
God, in a manner transcending understanding and comprehension, О pure one, 
and hast given birth to Him, incarnate from thy pure blood, revealed in two 
natures, but in a single Hypostasis. 
Both now ..., He who proclaimeth thee the Theotokos, О most pure one, 
prevaileth over every heresy; wherefore, О Birthgiver of God, having given birth 
unto the eternal Word of God Who immutably became flesh, thou art higher than 
all creation. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou Who 
in the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and 
didst establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save 
Thee, O only Lover of mankind. 
God made His abode within thy holy womb, О Mother of God, and became 
incarnate in a manner He Himself knew, and hath saved us by His life-bearing 
sufferings; wherefore, we glorify thee as the portal of salvation. 
The Supremely divine One, Who hath breathed the spirit (of life) into all, 
became incarnate on earth and dwelt with mankind, having been produced by thy 
womb seedlessly; wherefore, all of us, the faithful, bless thee with hymns, О pure 
one. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Having conceived in thy womb Him Who was begotten of the 
Father before all ages, О Virgin, without knowing a man, thou hast given birth for 
us to Him as both God and man, perfect and indivisible in both natures. 
Both now ..., О pure and divinely blessed Virgin, we all know thee to be the 
rod which budded forth Christ, the Flower of incorruption, and the golden censer 
who bore the burning Coal of the divine Essence in thine arms. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art 
my God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom 
of Thy Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the prophet 
Habbakuk I cry unto Thee, * “Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!” 
Of old the ark which received the divinely written law prefigured the life-
creating Word Who was ineffably conceived within thy womb, О most 
immaculate one, richly nourishing the souls of those who chant: Glory to Thy 
power, О Lover of mankind! 
Thou alone wast the true source of salvation, О Mother of God, who through 
thine all-pure blood gave flesh to the Creator and Fashioner, and through whom 
the gates of death have been broken down and life given to us. 
Glory ..., That in the richness of thy goodness Thou mightest seek out Thine 
image which was buried by the passions, Thou didst make Thine abode within the 
Virgin’s womb, and Thou, the Wisdom of God, didst make a temple from her; 
and having thereby come to dwell among mankind, О Compassionate One, Thou 
hast saved the ends of the world. 
Both now ..., After God it is thee whom we have acquired as an intercessor, О 
most immaculate one; for thou wast the Mother of God the Creator and 
Fashioner, Who took upon Himself our form, saved it from corruption and 
tribulations, and glorified it with divine glory. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
The generations of all mankind bless thee as the one who gave birth to the 
Creator, Fashioner and Lord, О most pure one, and the noetic leaders of the 
incorporeal hosts glorify thee as the Mother of God. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The armies of the hosts on high bless thee, О most pure one; for through thee 
alone we on earth have been united to those in heaven, wherefore we hymn thy 
birthgiving. 
Glory ..., In an ineffable manner, О Virgin, He Who alone is compassionate, 
the Word Who shone forth from the Father before all ages, made His abode 
within thee and become a man, delivering us from corruption and leading us up to 
a life of incorruption. 
Both now ..., Thou wast clothed with the beauties of virginity, О most pure 
Virgin, and hast done away with the nakedness of the first Eve, having given birth 
to Christ Who bestoweth the vesture of incorruption upon those who hymn thee. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and 
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
He Who upholdeth all things with His omnipotent power arrayed Himself in 
the weakness of the flesh through thee, О all-immaculate Virgin, for the good of 
mankind, in that He is the Lover of mankind. 
The all-accomplishing Spirit descended upon thee, О all-immaculate one, and 
the Word, of God made His abode within thee and ineffably assumed flesh, 
though He remained immutable. 
Glory ..., Illumine the souls of those who hymn thee in an Orthodox manner, 
О Bride of God, for the sayings of the prophets proclaimed beforehand thy most 
pure conception and birthgiving, which are beyond all telling. 
Both now ..., We piously hymn the most pure Mary, the truly divine and hon-
ored dwelling-place of God; for she contained God, receiving Him Who is infinite 
and unapproachable. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
As the all-immaculate Bride of the Creator, * Mother of the Redeemer, who 
knewest not a man, * and as the receptacle of the Comforter O all-hymned one, * 
hasten thou to deliver me, * the vile abode of iniquity and noetic plaything of the 
demons, * from their evil machinations; * and make me the bright dwelling-place 
of the virtues, * O thou incorrupt light-bearing one. * Drive away the clouds of 
the passions and grant that, * by thy supplications, * I may receive a portion on 
high ** and share in the never-waning light.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's condescension; * 
for which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing with joyous steps as in 
a meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
О most pure Lady who conceived the Redeemer of all, grant ineffable and 
divine deliverance unto me who cry aloud and sing: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers! 
Now have all things been filled with divine light through thee, О most pure 
one; for thou hast been revealed to be the door through which God held 
converse, enlightening those who cry out with faith: Blessed is the God of our 
fathers! 
Glory ..., Lo! the divine prophecy of the godly David hath now been fulfilled: 
They who have acquired the riches of grace truly entreat thy countenance, О pure 
Birthgiver of God, and now bless the God of our fathers. 
Both now ..., О most pure one, thou didst conceive Him Who is God and 
Lord over all, Whose good pleasure it was to save the race of mankind from death 
and corruption; and hymning Him as is meet, we cry aloud: Blessed is the God of 
our fathers! 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the tyrant 
and the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * wherefore 
they cried aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Cleanse thou the wounds of my soul and the stripes of my sins, О blessed, and 
most pure maiden, who from thy virginal womb which knew not wedlock gave 
birth to Him Who is God over all. Him do the children bless and supremely exalt, 
throughout the ages. 
Resplendent with the beauties of virginity, thou didst become the receptacle of 
the never-waning Light, О all-pure one, enlightening those who with all their soul 
confess thee to be the true Theotokos, and who cry aloud: Ye children bless; ye 
priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! 
Glory ..., Sanctified by the Holy Spirit, О all-immaculate Theotokos, thou didst 
truly receive in thy womb the beginningless Son Who with the Father is equally 
eternal, Who became incarnate within thee, О pure one, for the benefit of those 
who cry out with faith: Ye children bless; ye priests, hymn; ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout the ages! 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Both now ..., In that thou hast given birth to God in a manner past all telling 
and understanding, О most pure Mother of God, Him do thou beseech, that all of 
us who are unworthy may be treated with lenience by Him at the time of His 
awesome and dread coming, when He shall discern the nature of all who with fear 
will stand naked before Him and be judged. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were 
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy 
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the 
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
All of us who have rejected eternal life and have fallen, accursed, into death 
thou hast called again, О most pure Mother of the Redeemer, and hast granted 
them to hasten to our former homeland; wherefore, О Mother of God, we 
unceasingly magnify thee. 
Readily grant that I may pass over the waves of the perils of this life and its 
present sufferings, О Theotokos, stilling them, in that thou art good, and guiding 
me to the virtues of the way of heaven, that I may unceasingly magnify thee as my 
benefactress. 
Glory ..., О pure and most glorious Mother of God, save those who hymn 
thee with love from all perils, mercifully subduing our turmoil, in that thou hast 
given birth unto God; for thou canst freely do all that thou dost desire, О Virgin. 
Wherefore, we all magnify thee. 
Both now ..., The honored Church which Christ thy Son hath acquired with 
His precious blood, and hath saved from misfortunes and the violence which 
assails us, in that He is good, do thou show forth as victorious over budding 
heresy, О joyous Lady. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion, and 
the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII: 
Let us hymn the divine disciples of our God, who as beacons for the world 
and guides to our salvation, from the beginning shone forth upon us who were in 
darkness, and proclaimed to all the Sun of righteousness. And preaching the 
Trinity in a single Godhead, they cast down the falsehood of idolatry. Wherefore, 
we beseech you, О apostles: Entreat Christ God, that He grant us remission of 
sins and great mercy. 
Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, * and their words 
unto the ends of the world. 
Your most wise sound, which truly went forth unto all the ends of the earth, О 
all-famed apostles of the Lord, manifestly proclaimed the knowledge of God unto 
all, transformed heathen ignorance into understanding; wherefore, dispelling the 
darkness of idolatry, it shone forth the light of knowledge upon those in darkness. 
For this cause we pray: Entreat Christ God, that He grant remission of sins unto 
those who with love honor your holy memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Having fallen into subtle temptations by enemies, visible and invisible, I am 
beset by the tempest of my countless sins, О most holy one, and I flee to the 
haven of thy goodness as to a fervent help and protection. Wherefore, besech 
Him Who became incarnate of thee without seed, О most pure one, on behalf of 
all thy servants who unceasingly hymn thee, О all-pure Theotokos, and earnestly 
beseech Him, that He grant remission offenses unto those who with faith bow 
down before thy birthgiving. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII: 
The sound of the most wise apostles went forth unto all the earth, as said the 
prophet; for preaching the Word, they enlightened all the nations; wherefore, 
praising them with hymns, we honor them as is meet, for they ever entreat Christ 
that our souls be saved. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, * and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands. 
Receiving the commandments of the Lord in their souls with faith, like a rich 
treasury, the apostles showed themselves to all as benefactors, dispelling the 
poverty of the demons and enriching all with divine wealth. To them let us all cry 
aloud: With works of the virtues enrich us also, who are now impoverished, we 
pray. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Mortifying the fiery form and movements of the passions with 
temperance, the martyrs received the grace of Christ, to drive infirmities from the 
sick, and to work miracles, in that they live even after death. О what a truly most 
glorious wonder it is that bare bones pour forth healings! Glory to the one most 
wise Creator and God! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Virgin Birthgiver of God, intercessor for the faithful, joy of the sorrowful, 
and great consolation of those who weep: With the holy apostles unceasingly 
entreat on our behalf, Him Who was supra-naturally born from thine all-holy 
womb, that He deliver us at the hour of trial from grievous condemnation. 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Pondering what was mystically commanded ...”: 
Ye were shown to be radiant beacons ever enlightening the whole earth and 
dispelling the darkness of polytheism with the light of piety through your 
teachings, О ye who beheld Christ with your own eyes; wherefore, by your holy 
prayers enlighten me also, who am in the darkness of the passions, that I may walk 
without fear, О God-bearing apostles. 
Trawling for reason-endowed fish with the net of divine words, ye brought the 
first-fruits thereof to our God; and loving the wounds of Christ, ye arrayed 
yourselves therein, and showed yourselves to be emulators of His sufferings. 
Wherefore, assembling as is meet, we now celebrate your festival, О glorious 
apostles, and cry out together: Entreat Christ God, that remission of sins be 
granted to those who with love honor your holy memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The Son and Word of God whom nothing can contain, * in a manner beyond 
all telling and understanding * was born from thee, O Theotokos. * With the 
apostles do thou pray unto Him, * that He bestow true peace upon the Ecumene 
* and grant unto us before the end forgiveness of sins, * and in His extreme 
goodness ** deem thy servants worthy of the heavenly Kingdom. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy, glorious and all-praised apostles, the composition of 
Theophanes, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto 
our God and Redeemer let us sing. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
О radiant choir of the apostles who stand before the great Light, illumine my 
darkened heart, and guide me to the paths of salvation. (Twice) 
О true friends of the Redeemer, from the love of the passions deliver me who 
have been beguiled by the many deceits of life and am covered by the night of 
ignorance. 
As arrows of the Mighty One, О divine apostles, with your keen blades cure 
those wounded by the evil one, who flee under your protection with faith. 
Theotokion: Full of divine majesty, the Fruit of thy womb issueth forth, О 
pure Mother, saving those beguiled by the malice of the serpent. 
Another canon, of the holy hierarch Nicholas, the wonderworker, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: That which had been hewn down divided the undivided, * and land 
unseen was seen by the sun; * water engulfed the cruel enemy, * and Israel 
traversed the impassable, chanting a hymn: * Let us sing unto the Lord, * 
for gloriously hath He been glorified! 
Standing before the King of all with the choirs of the heavenly hosts, О 
blessed Nicholas, from every evil temptation save us on earth who ever call upon 
thee; and ask release from our transgressions. 
Enriched by thee, our intercessor, О Nicholas, we cry out to thee with faith 
day and night: Go now before us who are greatly afflicted by the wicked attacks of 
the demons and corrupt men, that, finding tranquility, we may praise thee. 
With the mighty cords of thy prayers, О Nicholas, give over to utter 
suffocation those who seek to strangle us, from their wicked assault delivering us 
who cry out in praise: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been 
glorified! 
Theotokion: In a manner transcending the laws of nature thou hast given birth 
to God the Bestower of the law, Who became a man. As thou art good, О all-
immaculate one, entreat Him to overlook the iniquities of us who ever cry out: Let 
us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath He been glorified! 
ODE III 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou 
art the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
О apostles of the Savior, with power ye gird about my heart, which hath been 
weakened by evil thoughts and the passions. (Twice) 
Proclaiming the one, Thrice-holy effulgence of God, the disciples dissipated 
the gloom of polytheism. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
As divine physicians and surgeons, treat ye the evil sores of my heart, О 
disciples of our God. 
Theotokion: Save me, О pure Lady who supra-naturally hast given birth to the 
Redeemer, Master, Savior and Lord of all. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
That we may honor and hymn thee always, grant us a helping hand, О holy 
hierarch Nicholas. 
By thine unsleeping prayers, О Nicholas, lull to sleep the perils which arise 
before us, we beseech thee. 
By thy mediation, О holy Nicholas, deliver me who am wholly imperiled by 
the passions and the temptations of wicked men. 
Theotokion: О pure one, entreat the Redeemer, that He grant me release from 
my sins and the cruel dangers of life. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Ye have been adorned, О glorious apostles, arrayed in divine splendors and 
enlightened by the rays of Him Who showed you to be luminaries. (Twice) 
О helmsmen of all, ye divine apostles, from every tempest deliver me who am 
imperiled upon the deep and am shaken by the dangers of life. 
Roiling the sea of polytheism, О divinely chosen steeds, with your 
supplications ye overwhelm the deep of my transgressions. 
Theotokion: In thy womb thou gavest flesh to the Word Who is equal in 
activity to the Father, О Virgin; wherefore, thou hast been revealed to transcend 
all creation, О Lady. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Because of the multitude of my transgressions I fall into many and countless 
tribulations. Make haste to help me, О holy Nicholas, emulating the Benefactor. 
Living in slothfulness, I weep over myself, who am perishing. By thy prayers, 
О Nicholas, guide me to repentance. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
О father Nicholas, who delivered the three youths who were to be executed, 
deliver me from all oppression and from everlasting condemnation. 
Theotokion: О most pure one, strengthen me to entertain heavenly thoughts, 
guiding the movements of my soul to the entries of life. 
ODE V 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our 
God, * and we know none other besides Thee. 
As helmsmen, О apostles, to the broad expanse of salvation guide me who am 
hemmed in by many transgressions. (Twice) 
О apostles who beheld God with your own eyes, from every dishonorable act 
deliver me, who honor your all-honorable council, I pray. 
In that ye emulated the sufferings of the Savior, О holy apostles, drive all 
passion for luxury from my soul. 
Theotokion: Cure my sick soul, О most pure Lady who hast given birth to 
Him Who taketh away the infirmities of all. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
By thy prayers, О divinely blessed Nicholas, strengthen us to keep the 
commandments of Christ, our one God. 
Having lived in Myra, О Nicholas, with divine fragrance fill us who piously 
hymn thee. 
Have pity on us By thy prayers, О holy hierarch Nicholas, entreating the most 
compassionate God, that we be delivered from misfortunes and tribulations. 
Theotokion: О maiden full of the waters of life, give drink to all of us who 
hymn thee with pious mind. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I 
proclaim my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto 
Hades hath drawn nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me up 
from corruption, O God. 
Ye cast down the temples of the idols, which shook at the sound of your 
supplications, О disciples of Christ. And I pray with faith: Break ye the idols of 
my mind, and show me to be a temple of God, though I am guilty of many sins. 
(Twice) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
О chosen ones who beheld God, and who like stones were founded upon the 
immovable Rock, save my heart, which hath foolishly been founded upon the 
sand; for the rivers rage dangerously and buffet me cruelly. 
О friends of Christ, from the beguiling love of the flesh deliver me, who have 
shown myself to be vile by my great evil; and bind me to the love of Him Who 
loveth sinners in the great mercy of remission. 
Theotokion: The Creator, choosing thee, О maiden, as a rose, as a most pure 
lily, as an aroma of sweet fragrance, from the beautiful vales of the world, and 
making His abode in thy womb, and being born from thee, hath filled all things 
with sweet savor. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Thy heart, О Nicholas, was like paradise, having Christ the Redeemer within it 
like the tree of life. Him do thou unceasingly entreat, that He make us all dwellers 
in paradise, enriched by thee, our fervent helper. 
I pass my life in slothfulness, and sin without fear, wretch that I am; but 
pondering the trial to come, which cannot be postponed, I am seized with fear. 
Have pity on me, О God, through the supplications of Nicholas, in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
When the tempest of many and varied temptations suddenly assails me 
because of the multitude of mine offenses, I cry out: Leave me not bereft of help, 
О blessed one, but as thou art merciful extend to me a helping hand, and save me. 
Theotokion: Thou wast the palace and fiery throne of the Most High King, О 
Virgin, who art more exalted than the cherubim and seraphim. Wherefore, every 
breath glorifies thee as the Mother of the Creator. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.  
The night of slothfulness holds me, and the darkness of sin covers me. О 
most wise apostles, who were shown to be the light of the world, hasten ye to 
illumine my darkened heart. (Twice) 
О divinely eloquent ones, who were shown to be another heaven declaring the 
glory of our God, from the indignity of the passions deliver those who with faith 
have recourse to your mighty protection. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
О apostles, who were shown to be burning coals alight with the fire of the 
Comforter, utterly consume all the tinder of our malice, and forever deliver us 
from, the unquenchable fire. 
Theotokion: Thou wast shown to be a mountain overshadowed and 
unquarried, from whence the Stone was cut; wherefore, О Lady, grant 
compunction to my darkened soul, which hath been hardened by the bitter love of 
pleasures. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Thou didst pour forth streams of doctrine, drying up the torrents of heresies 
and giving abundant drink to the souls of the faithful, О sacred minister Nicholas; 
wherefore, we honor thee. 
Enabled by the power of the Trinity, thou didst receive the strength to destroy 
false graven images; wherefore, I entreat thee with faith, О Father: Drive out the 
passionate idols of my mind. 
Thou wast the primate of the people of Myra, and even after death pourest 
forth divine myrrh, О most blessed Nicholas, dispelling the fetid ailments of us 
who approach thee with faith. 
Theotokion: Thou didst stop the flow of death, О thou who hast given birth 
to God immortal. Him do thou beseech, О pure one, that He mortify the passions 
of my lowly body, and grant me life. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “Ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages”. 
Strengthen my soul, which is whirled about by the passions, О ye who are the 
unbreakable foundations and unshakable pillars of the Church, the bulwark of the 
faithful, who draw out those who are in the depths of perdition, the right calm 
harbors of those who chant with faith: Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye 
people supremely exalt Him throughout the ages! (Twice) 
О disciples of the Savior, by your supplications raise me up who am in the 
grave of dark despair and lie in the netherworld, having fallen through pleasures. 
Have pity, О apostles who beheld God, for ye have manifestly been deemed 
worthy to be enriched with the Teacher’s compassion throughout all ages. (Twice) 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: As thou wast revealed to be splendid in the beauties of virtue, О 
all-pure one, within thy womb thou didst contain the beautifying majesty of the 
Creator of all. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He may throughout all ages 
majestically enlighten my soul, which is stuck fast in the sins of the passions, but 
seeketh its ancient beauty, О pure one. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely 
eloquent children sang: * 'Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord'. 
Enlightened by the radiant beams of the three-Sunned Godhead, О divinely 
wise and holy hierarch Nicholas, By thy prayers dispel the darkness of my 
passions. 
О Nicholas, initiate of the sacred mysteries, who delivered the three generals 
from death by thine awesome appearance, deliver us also from all deadly harm. 
By thy prayers, О most blessed Nicholas, make steadfast those who are beset 
by the temptations of the demons and oppressive men, and save us unharmed. 
Theotokion: Bring entreaty to the Lord, that He have pity and save those who 
have recourse to thee with faith, О all-holy Virgin, our helper. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the holy apostles 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were 
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy 
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the 
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
With the power of God ye broke the jaws of the soul-destroying lions, О 
apostles, for ye were ordained by Christ to be princes on earth, piously submitting 
in hymnody to this Spirit; wherefore, make the disorderly movements of my heart 
subject to the laws of God. 
Preaching the Word of God, Who is more comely than all the sons of 
mankind, and Who appeared in the world, ye made beautiful your feet, as ones 
proclaiming peace and life; wherefore, by your prayers bring peace to my soul, 
which is troubled by the passions. 
Having mortified your members on earth, ye clothed yourselves in all life, 
emulating the honored Passion by your sufferings; wherefore, О divinely blessed 
apostles, with the remedy of true repentance give life to me who have been 
wounded by the darts of the evil one’s malice. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Theotokion: In that thou art merciful, О thou who hast given birth to the 
supremely good God, heal my soul, which hath become sick through grievous 
passions; and ever deliver me from enemies who goad and attack me, О most 
pure one, that, saved, I may diligently magnify thee, whom our generation hath 
magnified. 
Canon of the holy hierarch 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do 
we magnify. 
As thou art the deliverer of those who with faith pray to thee in their sorrow, 
О Nicholas, deliver me from all malice, entreating the Lord God in prayer. 
О most holy father Nicholas, who art now with the heavenly choirs, beseech 
the good God, that He save us. 
Judgment is at the gates! Be watchful, О my soul, and cry out to God the 
Judge: Through the prayers of Nicholas save me, О Lord! 
Theotokion: As the receptacle of the Light, О Virgin, enlighten my soul, which 
hath been darkened by the passions, that I may ever glorify thee with faith and 
love. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the holy apostles, in Tone VIII: 
Fervently loving Thee on earth, О Lord, Thine apostles considered all to be 
but dung, that they might acquire Thee alone; and they gave their bodies over to 
wounds for Thee; wherefore, glorified, they pray for our souls. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
О Lord, Thou didst magnify the memory of the apostles on earth, for 
assembling together thereon, we all glorify Thee; since for their sake Thou hast 
granted healings, peace and great mercy to the whole world by their prayers. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
 
To the martyrs: Arrayed well in the breastplate of the Faith, having armed 
yourselves with the Cross as a sword, ye showed yourselves to be mighty warriors, 
manfully opposed the tyrants, and cast down the deception of the devil; and, 
victorious, ye were granted crowns. Pray ye ever on our behalf, that our souls be 
saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Rescue me, O lady, * from the hands of the man-slaying serpent, * who 
wickedly desireth to devour me utterly. * Crush thou his jaws, I pray thee, * and 
set at naught his wiles, ** that, delivered from his talons, I may magnify thine aid.  
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
ON THURSDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
Remember us, О Christ, Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the 
thief on the tree; and grant unto all Thy heavenly kingdom, О only 
Compassionate One. 
Like trumpets, О apostles of Christ, ye wakened those lying in the graves of 
ungodliness and brought them to share in the divine life. 
With the mystic seed of the Word, О divinely eloquent ones, ye rendered the 
barren hearts of all the nations fruitful with divine understanding; wherefore, ye 
are fittingly called blessed. 
To the martyrs: Having stripped yourselves of all evil, ye strode forth valiantly 
in the midst of evil men, and clothed yourselves in the robe of salvation from 
heaven, О spiritual athletes. 
Glory ..., By the supplications of Thy divine apostles mortify the uprisings of 
the evil passions of my wretched soul, О adored and all-holy Trinity, that, saved, I 
may glorify Thee. 
Both now ..., Rejoice, tongs of the divine Coal! Rejoice, seal of the prophets 
and teaching of the apostles, О most pure Theotokos, because of whom we have 
been freed from corruption! 
 
On Thursday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, 
* and their words unto the ends of the world.  
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: The heavens shall confess Thy wonders, 0 Lord, and 
Thy truth in the congregation of saints.  
Verse: God Who is glorified in the council of the saints. 
 
Communion Verse: Their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words unto the ends of the world.  
  
