--- PAGE 1 ---
ON THURSDAY EVENING: TONE VIII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
О most glorious wonder! * The Life-bearing Tree, * the most holy Cross is 
revealed today, * lifted up on high. * All the ends of the earth glorify it, * and the 
hordes of the demons are affrighted. * О what a gift hath been given to mortals! * 
Thereby, О Christ, save Thou our souls, ** in that Thou alone art compassionate. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
О most glorious wonder! * Like a vine full of life, * bearing the Most High, * 
the Cross is seen today uplifted from the earth. * Thereby have we all been drawn 
to God, * and death hath been utterly slaughtered. * О most honored Tree, * 
whereby, glorifying Christ, * we have received the immortal sustenance ** which 
was in Eden! 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
О the great goodness which Thou hast for us, * О good Jesus! * How didst 
Thou abase Thyself, * become a man, and will to suffer, * enduring the Cross and 
violent death * for Thy useless servants? * We offer the Cross to Thee as a worthy 
and divinely fitting gift; * and giving thanks, ** we, the faithful, glorify Thee. 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
О the ineffable goodness of Him * Who became incarnate from thee, О all-
hymned Theotokos! * For He Who is the Lover of mankind * endured the Cross 
and death, * that He might save what He created. * Entreat Him, that He may 
deliver me from torment, * the wretched one who am greatly sick, * and cause me 
to dwell ** where the never-waning light shines. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
“What is this sight which mine eyes behold, * О Master? * Lifted up upon the 
Tree, * Thou Who upholdest all creation dost die, * giving life unto all!”, * said the 
Theotokos, weeping, * when she saw the God and man * who ineffably shone 
forth from her ** suspended upon the Cross. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
О most pure one, * by thine honored supplications * deliver from misfortunes 
the flock which thy Son and God * sprinkled with His blood. * And fending off 
the invisible foe-like wolves, * fill their faces with shame, * as David the psalmist * 
proclaimed of old, ** О pure one. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee nailed to the Cross * and voluntarily 
accepting suffering, O Jesus, * Thy Virgin Mother, O Master, * cried aloud: Woe 
is me, my sweet Child! * How is it that Thou dost endure * unjustly inflicted 
wounds, * O Physician Who healeth the infirmities of mankind, * delivering all 
from corruption ** in Thy tender compassion?  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth. 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VIII: 
О Christ God Who wast lifted up upon the Cross, Thou didst save the race of 
mankind. We glorify Thy sufferings! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Thou wast nailed to the Cross, О Christ God, and didst open the gates of 
paradise. We glorify Thy divinity! 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the martyrs: Ye sanctify everyplace, О martyrs of the Lord, and heal every 
infirmity. Pray ye now, that our souls be delivered from the nets of the enemy, we 
beseech you. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: The unblemished heifer, beholding her Bullock * willingly 
nailed upon the Tree, * cried out aloud, lamenting piteously: * “Woe is me, O my 
most beloved Child! * How hath the ungrateful assembly of the Jews rewarded 
Thee, * desiring to leave me childless and bereft of Thee, ** O my most beloved 
Child?”  

--- PAGE 3 ---
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ON THURSDAY NIGHT: TONE VIII 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red 
Sea: * for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
О most immaculate Virgin, render Christ merciful unto me, setting me free on 
the day of the dread judgment. 
Rain down upon me drops of compunction, O Lady, washing away my 
defilement, that I may glorify thee. 
Glory ..., Illumine me, О Virgin who hast given birth to the never-waning 
Light, driving away the profound darkness of my slothfulness. 
Both now ..., Save me who have perished amid many sins, О Theotokos, and 
deliver me from every torment and grievous condemnation. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, 
* do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of 
the faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Having fallen, away from the life of sanctity, О most pure one, I have joined 
the dumb beasts and am wholly condemned; but do thou who hast given birth to 
the Judge deliver me from all damnation, and save me. 
Unto thee do I flee, О Lady. Ever save me who am beset by a multitude of 
perils, taking pity upon me, О only all-hymned one who hast given birth to the 
Savior and Lord of all. 
Glory ..., О Lady, thou impassable gate leading to God, open unto me the 
gates of repentance, I pray, cleansing me of the impurity of my sins with the 
showers of thy mercy, О thou who art full of the grace of God. 
Both now ..., Deliver me from the assaults of the passions, О Lady, and 
vanquish now the foes which wage war upon me; establish me upon the rock of 
the will of God, and illumine my soul, О portal of the divine Light. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Heal thou the stripes of my soul, О Virgin full of the grace of God, and 
illumine my mind, which hath been darkened by the incursions of the passions, О 
pure one. 
In that thou art the Mother of the Word, О most pure one, rouse me to 
repentance, for I sleep the sleep of despondency and am covered with sin. 
Glory ..., О Lady unwedded, thou who hast given birth to the incarnate Word, 
enlighten my soul, and deliver me from Gehenna and torment. 
Both now ..., In thee have I placed all my hope, О Virgin Mother; preserve my 
soul, О thou who hast given birth to God my Savior. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
Heal thou the wholly incurable sufferings of my soul, О maiden, light my 
lamp, which hath gone out through slothfulness, and guide me to the paths of 
repentance, О Virgin, that I may glorify thee with faith and love. 
I condemn myself even before the trial, О divinely joyous one. I alone among 
the accused bear shameful deeds. But intercede for me, in that thou art the 
advocate of all, and deliver me from grievous condemnation. 
Glory ..., Cease thou never to deliver me from captivity, from the soul-
corrupting turmoil which surrounds me, and from the grievous passions which 
slay me, О most holy maiden, ally of sinners and our ready helper. 
Both now ..., О most pure one who didst conceive the Life of the world, the 
Redeemer and King, impart life unto me who am wholly slain by the sting of 
death because of disobedience, and guide me to the Light. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and 
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Grant life unto me who have been slain by many transgressions, О most pure 
Virgin Theotokos who ineffably gave birth to the Life of mankind, and teach me 
to do the will of the Lord. 
All of us, the faithful, who are ever drowning in the abyss of evils, turmoil and 
griefs, have acquired thee as an intercessor and bulwark, О Theotokos, thou only 
refuge of the faithful. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., О most immaculate and most pure one, who through thy holy 
Offspring hast caused the growths of ungodliness to wither away: destroy the evil 
of the enemy which ever groweth within me. 
Both now ..., Sanctify my mind and illumine my heart, О holy Mother of God, 
and deliver me from the evils which assail me, that I may glorify thee, my steadfast 
helper. 
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
 “O the new wonder! О the awesome mystery!” the ewe-lamb cried, beholding 
her Son stretched out upon the Tree; “What is this, О immortal Word of God? 
How art Thou seen to be dead Who dost cause the earth to quake, in that Thou 
art almighty? Yet I hymn Thine awesome and divine condescension.” 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.  
Be merciful unto me, О Virgin, and with the dressing of thy prayer heal me 
who have been wounded by the sword of sin; and forever rescue me from the 
unquenchable fire. 
Deliver me from the cruel captivity which hath befallen me, from wicked 
thoughts and besetting transgressions, О Mother of the Savior, that, saved, I may 
ever glorify thee as is meet. 
Glory ..., I now flee unto thee, О Mother of God, bound by the fetters of 
transgressions. In the tender compassion of thy mercy loose me, О Virgin, and 
deliver me from the torment and malice of the demons. 
Both now ..., Take pity and save me, О Virgin who hast given birth to the 
compassionate Word of God, and with the light which is within thee illumine my 
soul, and deliver me from the cruel wiles of the demons. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “Ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages”. 
He Who is perfect in every way and unapproachable in essence hath shown 
Himself to be accessible to me, having been clothed in the flesh through thee, О 
thou who knewest not wedlock. Him do thou earnestly entreat, that He lighten 
the burden of mine iniquities and deliver me from the judgment which is to come. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
О most holy one, who in a manner past all telling hast given birth to the Judge 
and Lord, entreat Him as thy Son, that on the day of judgment He deliver from 
fire, from the darkness which is devoid of light, and from the gnashing of teeth 
me who ever piously hymns thee with faith. 
Glory ..., О most pure Birthgiver of God, cleanse thou the wounds of my soul 
and the temptations of sin, washing them away with the streams gushing forth 
from fountain which emanated from the side of thine Off-spring, for to thee I cry, 
unto thee I flee, and thee do I entreat, who art full of the grace of God. 
Both now ..., О most immaculate one, who alone hast manifestly given birth 
unto Life, grant life to my soul which hath been slain by the sting of the serpent; 
and hasten to do the will of Him Who was born for our sake, О Virgin, for I cry: 
Ye children bless; ye priests hymn; ye people supremely exalt Him throughout the 
ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were 
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy 
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the 
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
My soul, which hath been blinded by the passions, blackened by wicked 
thoughts and is beset by danger, do thou enlighten, О portal of the Light; and 
deliver me from perils, from the oppression of the demons, from grievous testing, 
and the coming flame and torment. 
О Savior Who wast born from the Virgin, and Who preserved her who gave 
birth to Thee incorrupt even after birthgiving, have pity on me when Thou shalt 
sit to judge my deeds. As Thou art sinless, overlook mine iniquities and sins, in 
that thou art a merciful God Who lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., Carrying the heavenly Fire in thine arms, as though with tongs, О 
pure one who art full of the grace of God, utterly consume the passions of my 
soul, and free me from dread judgment and fire, and from the cruel tyranny of the 
demons. 
Both now ..., With thy mystical effulgence enlighten our thoughts, hearts and 
reasoning powers, О maiden full of the grace of God, that treading the paths of 
life aright, we may obtain mercy, ever singing praises unto thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Troparion, and the 
rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter,  
The Sessional Hymns of the holy and precious Cross, in Tone VIII: 
Beholding the Author of life hanging upon the Cross, the thief said: “If Thou, 
Who art crucified with us, hadst not become God incarnate, the sun would not 
have lost its brightness and the earth would not have quaked with trembling. 
Remember me, О Lord, in Thy kingdom!” 
Verse: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the footstool of His feet, 
for He is holy. 
Thy Cross is found to be a scale weighing the two thieves; for the one was 
brought down to Hades by the burden of his blasphemy, while the other was 
borne up out of transgressions to the knowledge of theology. О Christ God, glory 
be to Thee! 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: Ever preserved by the Cross of thy Son and God, О 
Virgin, we confound the assaults and wiles of the demons; and hymning thee as 
the true Theotokos; with love all of our generations call thee blessed, as thou didst 
foretell. Wherefore, By thy prayers grant us remission of our offenses. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII: 
The tree in the midst of Eden blossomed forth death, but the Tree in the 
midst of the whole world hath produced life; for they who of old tasted the fruit, 
while incorrupt, became corrupt, but those who have obtained the latter have 
inherited incorruption. For by the Cross Thou hast saved the race of mankind, in 
that Thou art God. 
Verse: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth. 
In paradise of old the tree stripped me naked, and by my tasting the enemy 
brought mortality upon me; but when the tree of the Cross was planted in the 
ground, it brought us the raiment of everlasting life, and filled the whole world 
with joy. And beholding it uplifted, О ye people, with faith let us cry out together 
to God: Thy house is full of glory! 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Today this church is illumined with heavenly light; for therein 
the angelic armies rejoice, and with them the souls of the righteous are filled with 
gladness on the memorial of the passion-bearers. Through their prayers, О Christ, 
send down peace and great mercy upon Thy world. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: When thou didst see Him Who became incarnate of thy 
precious blood and was born from thee in a manner transcending understanding, 
hanging upon the Tree in the midst of malefactors, О pure one, thy womb was 
filled with pain, and thou didst cry out, weeping maternally: “Woe is me, О my 
Child! What is this Thy divine and ineffable dispensation, whereby Thou hast 
given life to Thy creation? I hymn Thy tender compassion! “ 
 After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Pondering what was mystically commanded ...”: 
By Thy Cross and death was the tyranny of the enemy cast down, and death 
put to death. The dead of times past, whom Hades held bound as captives within 
itself, were suddenly released, О good One, and they hymn Thy might and Thine 
awesome and divine condescension, whereby Thou hast saved us. 
Deluded by a false hope of deification, our ancestor thereby brought 
corruption upon all; but through Thy Cross Thou pourest forth life upon all, in 
that Thou art supremely good; for Thou wast willingly nailed thereto, that Thou 
rnightest release us from the primal curse. Wherefore, we hymn Thy voluntary 
suffering, О Christ. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb and Shepherd suspended upon 
the Cross, the unblemished ewe-lamb, cried aloud: “O my Child, what is this 
strange and unexpected sight? How can the Life of all be condemned to death like 
mortals? But rise Thou from the dead on the third day, O Word, as Thou didst 
say, that, rejoicing, I may glorify Thee!”  
ODE I 
Canon of the precious and life-creating Cross.  
The composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Inscribing the invincible weapon of the Cross upon the waters, * 
Moses marked a straight line before him with his staff * and divided the 
Red Sea, * opening a path for Israel who went over dry-shod. * Then he 
marked a second line across the waters * and united them in one, * 
overwhelming the chariots of Pharaoh. * Therefore let us sing to Christ our 
God, * for He hath been glorified. 
Stretching forth Thy divine hands on the Cross, О Jesus, Thou didst gather to 
Thyself the creation of Thine own hands’, freeing all from the hands of the evil 
one and subdueing him with Thy mighty hand, О King of all. Wherefore we the 
faithful hymn Thy majesty, for Thou hast been glorified. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Harmful was the bitter eating of the tree in Eden, which brought death upon 
us; but, dying on the Cross, Christ hath poured forth life upon all, slaying the 
serpent with His divine power. Wherefore, let us sing to Him, our God, for He 
hath been glorified! 
To the martyrs: Waging war, the multitude of the martyrs fought against the 
passions with Thy Cross and sufferings, О Jesus, and before the enemy they 
confessed Thee to reign over creation; and they endured tortures and boundless 
tribulations. Wherefore, they have received the glory of the Lord of glory. 
To the martyrs: Finding deliverance through the sprinkling of Thy deifying 
precious blood, О Lord, Thy martyrs truly shed their own blood, and, unjustly 
tortured, they refused to offer sacrifice to the vile soul-destroying demons. 
Wherefore, they brought themselves as honorable whole-burnt offerings unto 
Thee, the King of all. 
Theotokion: When she saw Thee, Who seest all things, nailed to the Cross, the 
immaculate one said, lamenting: “What is this, О my Child? How have those who 
enjoyed Thy many gifts rewarded Thee? How can I bear the pain? Glory be to 
Thy compassion and awesome dispensation, О Long-suffering One!” 
Another canon, of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto 
our God and Redeemer let us sing. 
By thy visitation, О Mother of God, enlighten my soul, which hath been 
darkened by the pleasures of life and is constantly vexed by the griefs of the 
world. 
The gates of heaven have been opened by thy divine birthgiving, О Mother of 
God. As thou art merciful, grant entry therein to my soul, and guide me to them. 
О Virgin, by thy mercy heal my soul, which hath been shot by the darts loosed 
by the evil one and is wounded by his wiles and schemes. 
As the hope of the hopeless and setting aright of the fallen, О thou who hast 
given birth to the divine Light, illumine my soul, which is in darkness. 
ODE III 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The rod of Aaron is an image of this mystery, * for when it budded 
it showed who should be priest. * So in the Church, that once was barren, * 
the wood of the Cross hath now budded forth, * filling her with strength 
and steadfastness. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Beholding Thee unjustly suspended upon the Tree, the sun changed its bright 
vesture to black, the rocks split asunder, and the whole earth quaked, О only 
Savior, Thou deliverance of all. 
Stretching out his arms, Moses prefigured the precious Cross; and we, now 
making the sign thereof with goodly wisdom, vanquish all the alien hordes of the 
demons, immune to all their harm. 
To the martyrs: Enduring sufferings, the passion-bearers emulated the 
suffering of Christ, and they underwent all manner of tortures for the sake of Him 
Who willingly suffered, slaying the passions and shining forth life upon the world. 
To the martyrs: Unwaveringly treading the path of torment, the right glorious 
passion-bearers cast from their hearts the stumbling-blocks of delusiion, and 
hastened in gladness to the place of divine rest. 
Theotokion: “I gave birth to Thee in a manner transcending the ways of men’s 
laws, О my Child,” the Theotokos declared, weeping; “How then have the 
iniquitous lifted Thee up upon the Tree in the midst of malefactors, О Thou Who 
alone set forth the law of life?” 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, 
* do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of 
the faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Grant me loud sighs, ardent tears and a contrite heart, О Virgin, that I may 
weep over what I have done; and destroy my growing passions, О thou who alone 
art all-hymned. 
Rescue my soul, which is heavy with sinful slumber and sunk in the bowels of 
Hades, О Lady, and grant me the thought of true repentance, О divinely blessed 
one. 
Love of contrition and the virtues do thou grant unto my soul, which hath 
been sunk by my transgressions, that it might love the life of heaven and possess 
divine desire. 
On thee do I set my hope, О Mother of God, and I am quickly delivered from 
despair; for I know, I know the richness of thy tender mercies and the power of 
thy boldness. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Bearing piety like the cedar, faith like the cypress, and love like the pine, we 
bow down before the divine Cross. 
By Thy Cross paradise hath been opened, О Savior, and man who had been 
condemned hath entered it again, magnifying Thy goodness. 
Having died, Thou gavest life to all who had died, and didst slay the serpent 
who introduced sin. 
To the martyrs: Emulating the sufferings of Christ, the divine martyrs were 
shown to share in the radiance of heaven. 
To the martyrs: Uniting themselves to the beautiful Word, the martyrs were 
adorned; and, loving the Sun of righteousness, they were splendidly enlightened. 
Theotokion: Unto Him Who was perfected before all ages hast thou given 
birth as a little babe, О all-immaculate maiden; and He hath perfected all things by 
His Cross and goodness. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art 
my God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom 
of Thy Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the prophet 
Habbakuk I cry unto Thee, * “Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!” 
О thou who hast ineffably given birth to God the Word, bind up the wounds 
of my soul with effective herbs, pouring out upon them the precious blood of thy 
Son, Who destroyed the soul-corrupting belly of Hades, and poured forth 
resurrection upon the world. 
О Bride of God, send down upon my soul the cleansing of transgressions, 
with streams wash away mine evil thoughts, and grant that it may become pure; 
for I have fled to thy mediation and help, О Virgin Theotokos. 
Unto thine aid do I now flee, О most pure one. Go thou before me, to deliver 
me from the cruel tempest of the enemy and the raging torrents of iniquity; and 
unerringly guide me to thy haven and thy tranquility, О Mother of God. 
With darts of sin the enemy hath wounded my whole soul; he hath defiled my 
heart with pleasures and turned me away from the straight path. Wherefore, I cry 
unto thee: Turning me back, heal and save me! 
ОDE V 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ the king and Lord was 
stretched! * Through thee the beguiler fell, * who tempted mankind with 
the tree. * He was caught in the trap set by God, * who was crucified upon 
thee in the flesh, * granting peace unto our souls. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Desiring to clothe us with the vesture of incorruption, for we have been 
stripped naked, Thou wast stripped naked; and crucified upon the Cross, Thou 
didst lay bare the wiles of the enemy. Wherefore, we glorify Thy sufferings. 
The saving blood which flowed from His side clearly cleansed the world, 
abolished the blood of the temples of the idols, restored those made subject to 
corruption by the fruit of knowledge, and poured forth incorruption upon our 
souls. 
To the martyrs: Resplendent in the beauty of their many wounds, and signed 
with the divine Blood, the glorious martyrs passed by the sword which before 
barred the way, and have made their abode, rejoicing, in paradise. 
To the martyrs: How wonderful art Thou, О Christ, in the saints who loved 
Thee with faith! For, enriched by Thee, they pour forth upon the world rivers of 
divine healing, drying up the effluence of our passions. 
Theotokion: Thou hast healed us who have been afflicted by sin, О most pure 
Virgin, who hast given birth to the Savior and Physician of all, Who was nailed to 
the tree of the Cross, and poured forth salvation upon our souls. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
With all diligence I hasten to thine aid, О all-immaculate one, and I lift up the 
eyes of my soul. Turn not away from me, but help and deliver me, in that thou art 
good, and wash away the defilement of my transgressions. 
Deadly poison lay in the fangs of sin, but thou didst supply an antidote thereto 
in the nails and divine spear of thine Offspring, Who in His tender compassion 
suffered in the flesh for our sake, О only all-hymned one. 
Grant life to me, who am slain by mine evil ways and corrupted by my 
transgressions, О thou who hast given birth to eternal Life; and turn me to 
incorruption by renewing my soul, О divinely blessed one. 
Deliver me from the evil of the demons and the malice of men, О Lady who 
alone hast given birth to the Healer of all flesh and offenses, the Savior and Lord, 
and quickly heal the pain of my soul and body. 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE VI 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross * within the 
belly of the sea monster, * plainly prefiguring the redeeming Passion. * 
Cast out from thence after three days, * he foreshadowed the marvelous 
Resurrection of Christ our God, * who was crucified in the flesh and 
enlightened the world * by His Rising on the third day. 
The Cross was planted in the midst of the earth at the place of the skull, and 
healed the sickness caused by the tree which grew in the midst of paradise; for 
Jesus the Messiah, Who alone is righteous, appeared in the midst of two iniquitous 
thieves, and with Himself hath raised up all, and cast down into the abyss him 
who fell headlong from the heights. 
Drawing the divine bow, Thy precious Cross О Christ, Thou didst loose Thine 
arrows at the slayer; with the nails of Thy hands Thou didst pierce his wrathful 
and most polluted heart, О Master; and Thou didst utterly slay him, granting life 
to those he had slain, О Compassionate One. 
To the martyrs: With the streams of blood which flowed from the bodies of 
the holy spiritual athletes they quenched all the flame of the madness of idolatry 
by the Spirit, watered the furrows of the honored Church, and caused the grain of 
salvation, hope and love to grow, wherewith every soul is nourished by divine 
grace. 
To the martyrs: The character of the glorious suffering passion-bearers was 
enflamed more than with fire, when the evil judges sentenced them to be 
consumed by material fire; but they were preserved unharmed through the activity 
and grace of the Holy Spirit, Who crowned them who suffered lawfully. 
Theotokion: A sword pierced thy heart, О most pure maiden, when thou didst 
see thy Son stretched out on the Cross, enduring sufferings, willingly pierced in 
His divine side by the spear, and slaying the adverse serpent of darkness; 
wherefore, weeping maternally, thou didst magnify Him. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and 
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Living in fornication, I have fallen away from God. I have become a wretched 
slave to pleasures, and am stripped bare of all the divine virtues. But visit me, О 
most pure one. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
I have shunned the commandments given me, and, having withdrawn from 
life, I have drawn nigh unto death. But instruct me to return, О most pure Mother 
of God. 
My life is wicked, full of indifference, but thy mercy is great and ineffable, О 
most pure one. Let the tender compassion of thy goodness prevail over my weak 
mind. 
О pure one, who hast given birth to the compassionate Savior and Redeemer, 
have pity on me, and save and deliver me from those who surround me and 
mercilessly attack my weakness. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: The senseless decree of the wicked tyrant, * breathing forth threats 
and blasphemy hateful to God, * confused the people. * Yet neither the fury 
of the wild beast nor the roaring of the fire * could frighten the three 
Children: * but standing together in the flame, * fanned by the wind that 
brought the dew as refreshment, they sang: * ‘Blessed and supremely 
praised art Thou, * O our God and the God of our fathers.’ 
When Thou wast stretched out upon the tree of the Cross like a grape-vine, О 
Word of the Father, mystically exuding the wine which doeth away with the 
drunkenness of disobedience gladdening all who acknowledge Thee to be God the 
Creator, Who willingly suffered. And it saveth those who chant: О all-hymned 
God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Thou didst endure the mockery of crucifixion, О Christ my God, bringing an 
end to the reproaches and sighing of men; Thou didst eat gall, transforming all the 
bitterness of evil; and Thou didst suffer Thy hands to be wounded, healing the 
wounds of our souls, О Compassionate One, and commanding us to chant: О all- 
hymned God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
To the martyrs: With your pangs, О valiant spiritual athletes, ye gained the life 
which is devoid of pain; wherefore, having received from on high the grace to heal 
our sufferings and dispel evil spirits, ye ease our pains, О holy ones; and standing 
forth before the faithful, ye save those who cry: О all-hymned God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou! 
To the martyrs: Ye stood before the tribunal, confessing Christ Who for our 
sake assumed flesh like ours, though without corruption, О martyrs; and truly 
showing yourselves to be emulators of His sufferings, ye endured fire and all other 
tortures, crying out in gladness: О all- hymned God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou! 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Theotokion: “I was filled with grief, beholding Thee, my Son, suffering 
unjustly; and I was wounded in soul when by the spear Thou wast pierced in the 
side,” weeping and lamenting the Theotokos, the only Lady, cried out, whom we 
all call blessed as is meet, piously crying aloud: О all-hymned God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou! 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.  
Having received the never-waning Light, О pure Virgin, thou art wholly 
radiant, and dost illumine those who cry to thee with faith: Blessed is the Fruit of 
thy womb, О most pure one! 
That thou mightest show forth thy mercy and love for mankind, О Virgin, 
lead me up from the depths of evils, who cry out: Blessed is the Fruit of thy 
womb, О most pure one! 
Wounded by soul-destroying darts, unto thee do I flee, О Virgin Mother. By 
thy prayer wholly protect me, who cry aloud: Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О 
most pure one! 
О Mother of the Savior, deliver me, who am held fast by cruel captivity, evil 
thoughts and sinful guilt, that, saved, I may ever glorify thee as is meet. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: O ye Children, equal in number to the Trinity, * bless ye God the 
Father and creator; * sing ye the praises of the Word who descended and 
changed the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye throughout the ages * 
the all-Holy Spirit, who giveth life unto all. 
Blessed is the Tree whereby all the curse of delusion in Eden was annulled, 
which resulted from the wicked eating of the tree; and Christ the exceedingly 
glorious One hath been exalted, for in His tender compassion He willingly desired 
to be lifted up thereon. 
Once, the ever-glorious one, crossing his arms in a sacred manner, blessed his 
grandsons, revealing the form of the sacred Tree, whereby blessing hath been 
imparted unto all who were cursed by the malignant fruit of the tree and stumbled 
headlong into the abyss of evils. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
All mankind was set aright when Thou, О Master, wast stretched forth on the 
Cross. The horde of evil demons fell, and those who were scattered came together 
in unity; and the might of Thine authority and Thy power are exalted throughout 
all ages. 
To the martyrs: О divine spiritual athletes of the Lord, ye have inherited 
blessed glory, incorrupt sustenance and splendid habitations, having joined the 
ranks of heaven, ye have now received with gladness the fulfillment of your ever-
glorious hopes. 
To the martyrs: Your courage shone forth more brightly than the sun, О 
radiant spiritual athletes of Christ, with divine power casting into darkness all the 
deception of the devil, and with pious wisdom enlightening the hearts of all the 
faithful throughout all ages. 
Theotokion: О most pure Virgin, blessed Mother of Him Who created all 
things, all of us, the faithful, call thee the noetic cloud, the tabernacle of sanctity, 
the throne of God, the portal and lampstand of the Light, and the daybreak of the 
Word. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “Ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages”. 
The Lord Almighty, Who dwelt in thy womb, showed thee to the faithful as a 
tower of confirmation; and fleeing to it we are delivered from perils and 
misfortunes, and are freed from temptation, chanting together: Ye priests hymn; 
ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Let the entreaty of my prayer rise unto the Lord Who issued forth from thy 
womb, О Lady, that He may deliver me from disobedience to His 
commandments, from condemnation and the curse of the law, that He may wash 
away the defilement of my grievous transgressions, in that He alone is merciful. 
О most pure Birthgiver of God, cleanse thou the wounds of my soul and my 
stumblings into sin, washing me clean with the streams which flowed from the 
side of thy Son; for to thee do I cry, to thee do I flee, and upon thee, who art full 
of the grace of God, do I call. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
ODE IX 
Canon of the precious Cross 
Irmos: Today the death that came to man through eating of the tree, * is 
made of no effect through the Cross. * For the curse of our Mother Eve * 
that fell on all mankind * is destroyed by the fruit of the pure Mother of 
God, * whom all the powers of heaven magnify. 
Exalting Thee most sacredly, О compassionate Master, we bow down before 
Thy Cross, the spear, the sponge, the reed, and the holy nails which pierced Thy 
hands and feet, whereby we have found perfect remission and have been deemed 
worthy to live in paradise. 
О how unjustly wast Thou condemned to be nailed, crucified, to the Tree, О 
Thou Who alone art the most just Judge of all, seeking to justify all who with faith 
glorify thy voluntary sufferings and dispensation, and who magnify Thee, О my 
Christ, with faith. 
To the martyrs: Giving their bodies over to tortures with all their soul, the 
glorious martyrs endured wounds and a violent death, the severing of their 
members, laceration, and burning by fire, and were aflame with love for the Lord; 
wherefore, crowned, they dwell in the heavens. 
To the martyrs: О Thou Who art the delight of the apostles and martyrs, By 
thy prayers fill us all with mercy, in that Thou art compassionate, granting us the 
remission of our sins, deliverance from all evils, and a place to dwell in Thy 
kingdom, О Thou Who for our sake appeared as a man. 
Theotokion: О Virgin, thou wast shown to be a radiant bridal-chamber for 
Him Who made His abode within thine incorrupt womb, Who by His will 
endured His blessed passion, and in His ineffable mercy granted dispassion unto 
all. Worshipping Him with faith, we piously magnify thee. 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were 
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy 
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the 
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
О thou who art truly the divine Mother of God, never cease to entreat Him 
Whom thou didst bear, that He grant now to thy servants remission of sins and 
perfect forgiveness to them for the evils they have committed; and that He grant 
them everlasting bliss with all the saints. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
О most holy Theotokos, gird about my lowly soul with the might and power 
of the Spirit, with weaponry and dominion, and arm it with the sword of the 
Cross. And cleanse the wounds of my sin with the dew of thy love for mankind 
and thy great mercy. 
Be unto me a pillar of salvation, О pure one; and render the hordes of the 
demons impotent, dispelling the turmoil of dangers and misfortunes, driving far 
away the assaults of the passions, and granting all of us pure liberation. 
О pure and most glorious Mother of God, save those who hymn thee with 
love, mercifully quelling the tumults of temptation; for as thou hast given birth 
unto God, О Virgin, thou art able to do whatsoever dost will, and freely grantest 
mercy. Wherefore, we all magnify thee. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the precious Cross, in Tone VIII: 
The staff of Moses prefigured Thy precious Cross, О our Savior; for thereby 
Thou hast save Thy people from the depths of the sea, О Lover of mankind. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, О Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look upon 
Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their sons. 
Of old the Garden of Eden put forth in its midst the tree whose fruit was 
eaten; but Thy Church, О Christ, hath caused the Cross to spring forth, pouring 
out life upon the world. The one brought death upon Adam, who ate of its fruit, 
but the other gave life to the thief who was saved by faith. О Christ God, Who by 
Thy suffering didst break the snares laid for us by the enemy, show us to share in 
his salvation, and grant us Thy kingdom, О Lord. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hands do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the work of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
To the martyrs: What shall we call you, О saints? Cherubim, for Christ rested 
on you. Seraphim, for ye glorified Him without ceasing. Angels, for ye rejected 
your bodies. Powers, for ye work miracles. Many are your names, and great your 
gifts. Pray ye that our souls be saved. 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
 Stavrotheotokion: “I cannot bear to see Thee asleep upon the Tree, Who 
givest wakefulness to all, that Thou mightest give divine and saving watchfulness 
to those who have fallen into most pernicious sleep through the fruit of 
disobedience!”, the Virgin, whom we magnify, said, weeping. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
ON FRIDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
Remember us, О Christ, Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the 
thief on the tree; and grant unto all Thy heavenly kingdom, О only 
Compassionate One. 
Thou didst stretch forth Thy hands upon the Tree, О Christ, and, rebuking 
the princes and powers of evil, hast saved from their harm those who piously 
glorify Thee. 
Pierced by the spear as Thou didst hang upon the Tree, Thou didst pour forth 
torrents of immortality upon us who mindlessly brought death upon ourselves by 
our transgression; wherefore, we glorify Thee with fear. 
To the martyrs: Strangers to all earthly pleasures which arise, the spiritual 
athletes gave themselves over to strange torments, wounding the apostate spirit 
with their wounds. 
Glory ..., Thou didst willingly endure suffering on the Cross, О Thou Who art 
One of the beginningless Trinity. Dry up all the torrents of my passions, and grant 
me salvation. 
Both now ..., Seeing Emmanuel, the Lamb and Word of God, hanging bodily 
upon the Tree, the only unblemished Ewe-lamb and Virgin was seized by grief 
and shed tears. 
 
On Friday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: Exalt ye the Lord our God, * and worship the 
footstool of His feet, for He is holy.  
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: Remember Thy congregation which Thou hast 
purchased from the beginning.  
Verse: God is our King before the ages, He hath wrought salvation in the 
midst of the earth.  
 
Communion Verse: Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth, 
O God. 
  
