--- PAGE 1 ---
ON FRIDAY EVENING: TONE VIII 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 3 Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, О Lord, О Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
O martyrs of the Lord, ye sanctify every place and heal every manner of 
infirmities: and now we entreat you to intercede on our behalf, that our souls may 
be delivered from the snares of the enemy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, О Lord; my 
soul hath waited patiently for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, no longer mindful of the temporal things of this life, 
despised not torture for the sake of the life to come, which they manifestly 
inherited, wherefore they rejoice with the angels. By their supplications grant great 
mercy to Thy people. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
What virtue, what praise, are due the saints? For they bowed their heads 
beneath the sword for the sake of Thee Who bowed down the heavens and 
descended to us; they shed their blood for Thee Who abased Thyself and assumed 
the form of a servant; they humbled themselves even unto death, imitating Thy 
poverty. By their intercessions, О God, have mercy on us, in the multitude of Thy 
compassions! 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion; or if there is no Menaion, these Stichera of 
compunction, in the same tone:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him there is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
I have become like the barren tree, as if clad with useless leaves; and I am 
afraid that if I am cut down, Thou wilt send me into unquenchable everlasting 
fire, О Master. But grant me time to convert, that I may offer Thee the goodly 
fruit of virtuous acts, and may be deemed worthy of Thy kingdom. 
Verse: О praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
O Lord, О Lord, Who lovest mankind, turn not Thy face away from me, Thy 
servant, who angereth Thy goodness every day, neither punish me by Thy 
righteous wrath, О Christ. I confess that I have sinned, I have sinned against Thee 
like none other. But have pity and save me, by the prayers of Thy Mother. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
When in Thy glory Thou shalt sit as the King of all upon Thy judgment-seat, 
and all the holy angels stand before Thee with fear, and all human nature will 
stand before Thee to be judged, О Christ; then, through the supplications of Thy 
Mother, О Lord, from all torments deliver those who have fallen asleep in faith. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth 
forth from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold 
in nature but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect 
God and perfect man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O 
unwedded Mother, ** that our souls find mercy!  
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God, and from them that rise up 
against me redeem me. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., Then: 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
O ye martyrs of the Lord, we beseech you to intercede before our God: pray 
ye that abundant mercy be granted to our souls, and the cleansing of our many 
sins. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
I weep and lament when I contemplate death and behold our beauty, which 
hath been created according to the image of God, lying in the grave, bereft of 
form, devoid of glory, unsightly. О the wonder! What is this mystery concerning 
us? How have we been given over to corruption? How have we been yoked 
together with death? Truly, as it is written, this is by the command of God, Who 
giveth rest unto the departed. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Thy death, О Lord, won immortality for us; for if Thou hadst not been laid in 
the tomb, paradise would not have been opened. Wherefore, grant rest to the 
departed, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O pure Virgin, portal of the Word, Mother of our God: pray thou that we be 
saved.  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ON FRIDAY NIGHT: TONE VIII 
AT COMPLINE 
Canon of supplication to the most holy Theotokos 
ODE I 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red 
Sea: * for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Mortify the understanding of my flesh, О most pure Virgin who hast given 
birth unto life, and deliver me from every torment. 
With the most radiant splendor of Him Who shone forth from thee, О Virgin, 
enlighten the eyes of my soul, that I may glorify thee. 
Glory ..., Pray thou, О holy Lady who alone art the Theotokos, that I may 
obtain salvation and divine radiance on the day of judgment. 
Both now ..., О most holy Theotokos who without pain hast given birth unto 
Christ in a manner transcending understanding and all telling: quell thou the pangs 
of my heart. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * Thou 
art the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
By thy prayers deliver me from the darts of the enemy, О most pure one, and 
spare my heart from besetting thoughts. 
Heal thou the wounds of my soul, О most immaculate Mother of God, and 
By thy prayers still the turmoil of my heart. 
Glory ..., Subdue the chaos of my thoughts, О pure Lady, and take from, my 
soul every grief, О thou who hast given birth unto Joy. 
Both now ..., Rejoice, О Virgin Mother of Christ, thou salvation of those who 
have recourse unto thee! Rejoice, О boast of the apostles and martyrs! 
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
О Word of God Who wast wounded for my sake in Thy love for mankind: 
Heal the wounds of my soul, and enlighten the darkness of my mind. 
The sleep of sin hath overtaken me through the slumber of my slothfulness, О 
Virgin. But by thy vigilant supplication rouse me to repentance. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., О most immaculate one who hast poured forth the water of 
remission from thy wellsprings: Give drink to my heart, which hath grown dry 
through all manner of transgressions. 
Both now ..., О all-holy Bride of God, Sovereign Lady of the world: save me, 
delivering me from misfortunes and dispelling the tumult of the passions. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our 
God, * and we know none other besides Thee. 
Look down, О most pure Lady, hearken unto my voice, and wash away all 
mine iniquities. 
О Theotokos who hast given birth to the never-setting Sun, enlighten me who 
have become wholly dark through the passions, that I may glorify and praise thee, 
О most immaculate one. 
Glory ..., Have pity on my soul, О most holy maiden, and deliver it from 
damnation and everlasting torment. 
Both now ..., Heal mine ailing soul, О most holy Lady who hast given birth to 
Him Who taketh away the infirmities of all. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The abyss of my sins and the storm of my transgressions * 
disquieten me and thrust me down * into the depths of despondency; * but 
do Thou stretch forth Thy mighty arm, * unto me as Thou didst to Peter, * 
and save me, O my Guide.  
By thy vivifying birthgiving mortify the unseemly uprisings of my flesh, О 
Theotokos who hast given life unto those slain by evil, that I may glorify thee as 
the cause of the restoration of mankind. 
О Virgin Theotokos who hast given birth to the Abyss of compassions, save 
my soul from the sorrows of life, and open unto me the spiritual portals of joy; for 
in thee alone have I placed my hope. 
Glory ..., That I may joyously hymn thy mighty works and the great grace of 
thy miracles, О most pure Virgin, By thy prayers ever free me from the unseemly 
thoughts which afflict me. 
Both now ..., In a manner transcending nature didst thou give birth unto Him 
Who did not depart from the bosom of the Father, yet through thee, О Virgin, 
conversed with men. As thou art the boast and confirmation of all of us, О 
Theotokos, take pity upon those who flee unto thee. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Lord, have mercy, (Thrice).  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
The Word of the Father descended to the earth, and the radiant angel said to 
the Theotokos: “Rejoice, О blessed one who alone hast preserved the bridal-
chamber, accepting the conception of the pre-eternal God and Lord, that God 
might save the race of mankind from delusion!” 
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.  
Woe is me! How shall I escape the torments which await me who have lived 
wickedly on earth? How shall I appear to the dread Judge as other than accursed? 
О Lady, Birthgiver of God, be thou my helper then! 
Quench thou the flame of my passions and still the tempest of my heart, О 
pure Mother of God; and deliver me from the tyranny of the demons and from 
the eternal fire, О most pure one. 
Glory ..., Behold the sorrow which the multitude of mine evils have brought 
upon me, О Virgin, and before my departure grant me rest, assuaging thy Son by 
thy maternal supplications. 
Both now ..., With thy dew extinguish the flame of the passions of my heart, О 
Virgin maiden, and rescue me from the dread fire, from eternal damnation and the 
tyranny of the demons. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: O ye Children, equal in number to the Trinity, * bless ye God the 
Father and creator; * sing ye the praises of the Word who descended and 
changed the fire into dew; * and supremely exalt ye throughout the ages * 
the all-Holy Spirit, who giveth life unto all. 
Mortify all the uprisings of our bodies, О Virgin who by thy Life-bearing 
birthgiving didst slay the serpent, and pray that we may receive the life which 
ageth not, that we may hymn thee forever. 
I ever invoke thine aid, О Birthgiver of God. Put me not to shame who have 
already acquired shame, but take pity upon me, О most pure one, rescue me from 
the flame, and deliver me from eternal torments. 
Glory ..., Show thyself to me as a joyous helper amid evil circumstances, 
delivering me from the assaults which the demons launched at me, that I may ever 
bless thee, О Theotokos, as the intercessor for all. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Both now ..., О most holy maiden, thou boast of the apostles and glory of the 
martyrs, cause me to share in eternal glory, who cry aloud: Bless the Most Holy 
Spirit throughout all ages! 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Thou hast passed the limits of nature, * having conceived the Maker 
and the Lord, * and didst become a door of salvation * unto the world; * 
wherefore we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
With thy never-waning light drive away the cruel darkness from my soul, О 
portal of the Light, and show me the luminous paths of repentance, that, treading 
them, I may elude the gloom of sin and may unceasingly magnify thee. 
Cleanse thy servants, О good One, and grant us forgiveness of transgressions; 
deliver us from the eternal flame, that we may share in Thy kingdom, О Word of 
God, for Thou didst endure the Cross in Thy desire to save the race of mankind. 
Glory ..., Grant that I may easily pass through the journey of this life, О 
Theotokos, subduing the uprisings of temptations and perils, in that thou art 
good, and guide me to the virtues of the heavenly kingdom and divine rest, that, 
saved, I may glorify thee. 
Both now ..., In that thou hast given birth to the supremely good God and art 
merciful, heal thou my soul, which is sick with grievous suffering, and ever deliver 
me from the evils which oppress and assail me, О most pure one, that, saved, I 
may fervently magnify thee who hast magnified our race. 
Then, “It is truly meet ...,” and a prostration. Trisagion through Our Father ..., 
Troparion, and the rest as usual. Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT MATINS 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the  
Sessional Hymns of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
O holy martyrs, ye were shown to be noetic beacons, for by faith ye have 
dispersed the gloom of deception, ignited the lamps of our souls, and entered with 
glory into the heavenly bridal chamber of the Bridegroom. * Wherefore we now 
entreat you, intercede that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
By their temperance, the martyrs of Christ mortified the fiery impulses of the 
passions, and received the grace of Christ, whereby they drive infirmities from the 
sick, and work miracles, in that they are alive, even after death. O what a truly all-
glorious wonder it is, that their bare bones pour forth healings. Glory be to our 
one God. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the Resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth 
Thy love for mankind, O merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the 
Theotokos who bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “Pondering what was mystically commanded ...”: 
О prophets, martyrs of Christ, and holy hierarchs, who with the wisdom of 
piety lawfully finished the good race and received unfading wreaths from God, 
unceasingly ask His grace for us, that He grant us the forgiveness of our 
transgressions, in that He is a readily conciliatory God. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, О 
Lord. 
For the reposed: Those who have piously departed from transitory things do 
Thou number among the righteous in the habitations of the elect, О Master, 
granting them rest in the place of those who keep festival and in the endless bliss 
of paradise, forgiving them their voluntary and involuntary transgressions in Thine 
extreme beneficence, in that Thou art good. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: O Thou Who by the depth of Thy wisdom dost provide all 
things out of love for mankind, and grantest unto all that which is profitable, O 

--- PAGE 9 ---
only Creator: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy servants; for in Thee have 
they placed their hope, O Creator and Fashioner and God. 
.Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Theotokion: In thee we have a rampart and a haven and an intercessor 
acceptable to God, Whom thou didst bear, O Theotokos unwedded, salvation of 
the faithful. 
ODE I 
Canon of the holy martyrs, hierarchs, the venerable and the departed, the 
acrostic whereof is “the divine conclusion of the new Oktoechos,” the 
composition of Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto the Lord, * who led His people through the Red 
Sea: * for He alone hath gloriously been glorified. 
Ye were revealed to be precious pearls rendering the crown of the honored 
Church brilliant, О most valiant passion-bearers of Christ. 
With divine splendors the most wise and holy hierarchs shone forth the dogma 
of the virtues, enlightening the hearts of the faithful. 
О Word Who art wondrous in the prophets and the righteous, we beseech 
Thee: By their prayers save us! 
When Thou, the righteous Judge, shalt come to do what is most just, О Word, 
save us from condemnation by their supplications. 
Theotokion: Knowing thee to be the one who gave birth to the Lord, О 
Virgin, the choirs of women who suffered, following in thine entourage, are 
brought before Him. 
Another canon, of the departed, the acrostic whereof is “I fashion an 
eighth hymn for the faithful departed,” in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto 
our God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Having emulated the death of Christ by their death and His 
honored suffering by their sufferings, all the martyrs have received divine and 
blessed life. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
For the reposed: Overlooking the transgressions of youth and transcending 
our sins, О Christ our Savior, number among Thine elect Thy servants who have 
fallen asleep. 
Glory ..., Unto Thy servants whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, О greatly 
Merciful One, richly grant the glory and joy which those who acquired a blessed 
sojourn have received. 
Theotokion: Thou didst conceive the Word of the Father, Who united 
Himself hypostatically to the flesh He received from thee, and Who abolished 
Hades with divine power, О all-immaculate maiden. 
ODE III 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou Who 
in the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and 
didst establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save 
Thee, O only Lover of mankind. 
Spurning vile sacrifices with most mighty intent, the spiritual athletes became 
most pure sacrifices for the Word Who was sacrificed. 
Renewing with sanctifying words those grown old through all the passions, ye 
revealed yourselves to be divine disciples of the Word Who hath renewed the 
world. 
The grace of the all-holy Spirit, which of old was manifestly imparted to the 
prophets, hath in the latter times filled the ascetics with divine gifts. 
Join Thou to the choirs of the saints those who have passed from this life with 
faith, О God, and in Thine ineffable mercy cause them to dwell in paradise. 
Theotokion: Jesus our Lord, Whom naught can contain, made His abode 
within thy sanctified womb without being circumscribed, О most pure and all-
hymned Virgin. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: O Lord, Creator of the vault of Heaven * and Builder of the Church, 
* do Thou strengthen me in Thy love, O Summit of desire, * O Support of 
the faithful, * O only Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Cleansed of the ancient fall of our first parents, and having 
been sprinkled with baptism, regeneration and the streams of your blood, О 
blessed ones, ye reign with Christ. 
 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
For the reposed: О Savior, Who wast willingly laid dead in the tomb, and 
called forth those who abode in the grave, be Thou well-pleased that those whom 
Thou hast taken from us may dwell in the habitations of Thy righteous. 
Glory ..., Entreated by the compassion of Thy divine goodness, which is 
understood consubstantially, О Master and Savior, give rest to Thy servants, 
granting them remission of their sins. 
Theotokion: He Who alone is manifestly the Lover of mankind, who was 
incarnate from thy womb and became a man, doth save mankind from the gates 
of death, О only most pure and all-hymned Mother of God. 
ODE IV 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Passing through the arena of torments, О divinely blessed spiritual athletes, 
with the fervor of the Spirit ye utterly consumed the tinder of delusion. 
Thou hast splendidly glorified Thy venerable and holy hierarchs, О Lord. By 
their divine supplications show me to partake of Thy glory. 
The inspiration of the divine Spirit, which enlightened the prophets, gave 
women the strength to cast down the arrogance of the enemy. 
О supremely good One, having been entreated, grant that Thy servants, whom 
Thou hast taken to Thyself, may join chorus with all the saints in Thy holy 
habitations 
Theotokion: In a manner transcending nature, О all-immaculate one, thou hast 
given birth to the Bestower of the law of God, Who hath refashioned fallen 
human nature. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art 
my God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom 
of Thy Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the prophet 
Habbakuk I cry unto Thee, * “Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!” 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: That they might behold Thy glory and splendidly receive 
Thine effulgence in the heavens, О Master, the divine martyrs endured all manner 
of tortures, singing to Thee, О Christ: Glory to Thy power, О Lover of mankind! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
For the reposed: In Thy house are many mansions, О Savior, which are set 
aside for all according to the measure of their virtues, as is fitting. Be Thou well-
pleased, О Compassionate One, to fill them with those who have reposed in faith, 
piously chanting unto Thee: Glory to Thy power, О Lover of mankind! 
Glory ...: Thou didst appear as a man equal to us, О Immortal One, didst 
endure death as do all, and hast shown us the path to life. In that Thou lovest 
mankind, free those who have departed from us, granting them forgiveness 
offenses, О Master, and give them a share of Thy light. 
Theotokion: Thou art the boast of the faithful, the intercessor and refuge, the 
bulwark and haven of Christians, О unwedded and all-immaculate one, and thou 
bearest entreaties to thy Son, saving from misfortunes those who with faith and 
love know thee to be the Theotokos. 
ODE V 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Illumine us O Lord with Thy commandments, * and with Thine 
arm raised on high * grant us Thy peace, * O Lover of mankind!  
The divine martyrs bore the wounding of their flesh; wherefore, they ever heal 
our wounds, wounding the demons. 
О holy hierarchs of God, with all the venerable entreat Christ, that He grant us 
remission of sins. 
Laying waste to their bodies with discomfort and asceticism., the venerable 
women have been deemed worthy of that for which they truly hoped, О Lover of 
mankind. 
О Immortal One, Who destroyed death by Thy death, in that Thou lovest 
mankind grant rest to Thy faithful servants, who have died in the hope of life. 
Theotokion: Thou hast annulled the condemnation of our first father, О pure 
one, having given birth in the flesh unto Jesus, the one Lord, Who hath justified 
all. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
For the reposed: In the habitations of the saints, where the beauteous cry is 
heard of those who keep festival, grant the life of dispassion, Thine ineffable glory 
and Thy blessedness, which is past all telling, unto those who have departed, О 
Thou only Lover of mankind, taking pity on them. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: In the bosom of Abraham, where the ranks of the angels are, 
and where the assemblies of the righteous rejoice, grant Thy servants to dwell, О 
loving Savior, and be Thou well-pleased that they stand with boldness before Thy 
dread and divine throne. 
Glory ..., Thou wast shown to be our purification, righteousness and 
deliverance, О Compassionate One, and by Thy wounds hast healed our 
infirmities; wherefore, in that Thou art good, grant unto those who have departed 
the delights of paradise. 
Theotokion: Thou didst mercifully assume the form of man, О Merciful One, 
Who adornest all with the transcendent exaltations of divine glory, receiving 
animate and reason-endowed flesh from the Virgin’s womb, by which Thou didst 
destroy death. 
ODE VI 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead me up 
from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I cried, * and 
Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
With your honored stripes ye heal the infirmities of men’s souls, О holy 
martyrs, and ever remove the corruption of their bodies, wounding the multitude 
of evil demons. 
The choir of the venerable, the company of holy hierarchs, and the divine 
assembly of sacred women, who struggled steadfastly, have inherited bliss in the 
heavens. 
Having mortified the flesh, ye received life, О ascetics; and having tended well 
the flock of Christ, О most wise and holy hierarchs, ye were deemed worthy of 
immortal glory after your repose. 
О Word, Who art the life of the living and rest of the dead: Cause Thy 
servants, who have departed from us at Thy divine command, to dwell in the 
bosom of Abraham, Thy favored one. 
Theotokion: The Effulgence of the Father dwelt within thee, О pure one, and 
with the immaterial rays of His divinity destroyed the darkness of polytheism, 
illumining the world. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Same as the foregoing. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
To the martyrs: Wounded in their souls by the love of Thee, Thy martyrs, О 
Savior, endured many tortures, desiring everlasting glory and Thy sweet 
communion. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: Thou didst cut open the belly of the enemy by Thy death, 
and didst resurrect all who were held prisoner therein, О Bestower of life. Grant 
this unto those who have departed, О Benefactor. 
Glory ..., Thou didst free Thy servants in Hades from tears and sighing, О 
Savior, for as Thou alone art full of tender compassion, Thou hast wiped away 
every tear from the face of all who bless thee with faith. 
Theotokion: He Who formed nature hath taken form in thy womb; He Who is 
complete hath emptied Himself, О all-immaculate one; He Who alone is immortal 
hath submitted to death for our salvation. 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
With the saints give rest, О Christ, to the souls of Thy servants, where there is 
neither pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, but life never-ending. 
Ikos: Thou alone art immortal, * Who hast created and fashioned man; * but 
We mortals were fashioned from the earth, * and unto earth shall we return, * as 
Thou Who fashioned me didst command and say unto me, * “For earth thou art 
and unto earth shall thou return,” * whither all We mortals are going, * making 
our funeral lament the song: ** Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
ODE VII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: In Babylon, the pious youths did not worship the golden image, * 
but, bedewed in the midst of the fiery furnace, * they chanted a hymn, 
saying: * O supremely exalted God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!  
Having destroying the hedge of ungodliness with your sacred bonds, release 
from me the burden of mine offenses, О all-praised martyrs, and save me who 
cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers! 
With the showers of your sacred blood ye extinguished the fire of heresies, and 
by the flame ye burned up the tares of the delusion of ungodliness, enlightening 
the souls of the faithful. 
Having mortified the flesh with asceticism, the fasters live even after death; 
and the choir of the prophets and the righteous, and the company of women who 
struggled, have been glorified. By their supplications, О Christ, deliver us from 
misfortunes. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Grant rest, О Christ, unto the souls of all who have fallen asleep in the hope 
of life, in Thy great loving-kindness overlooking the offenses they committed in 
this life, О only compassionate Savior. О God of our fathers, blessed art Thou! 
Theotokion: As thou art wholly pure, thou didst receive the incarnate Word 
within thy womb. Him do thou entreat, О most pure one, that He cleanse the 
infirmities of soul and body of me who have recourse unto thee with pure faith. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * 'Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord our God, throughout the ages'.  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: All the desire of the martyrs was for the one Master, for they 
were united to Him in love and chanted: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God, 
throughout the ages! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: The splendor of the divine kingdom dost Thou give to those 
who have departed in faith, granting the vesture of incorruption unto those who 
cry out: Blessed art Thou, О Lord God, throughout the ages! 
Glory ...,With joy and gladness fill Thy servants whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself, О Compassionate One, Who called them to Thee, that they might chant: 
Blessed art Thou, О Lord God, throughout the ages! 
Theotokion: Annulling the curse of Eve, Thou madest Thine abode within the 
most immaculate Virgin, pouring forth a fountain of blessing upon those who cry: 
Blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, О most pure one! 
ODE VIII 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely 
eloquent children sang: * 'Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord'. 
Suffering, ye demolished the temples of the idols and made yourselves temples 
of the divine Trinity, О passion-bearers of the Lord, conversers with the angels. 
Thy priests, О Christ, having clothed themselves in righteousness with those 
who lived holy lives in times past, now rejoice, most clearly beholding Thy divine 
beauty. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
By the supplications of Thy most sacred prophets, the ever-memorable 
women, and the righteous of ages past, О Word, grant Thy mercies unto Thy 
world. 
О just Judge, when Thou wilt judge those whom Thou hast taken from among 
us, preserve them uncondemned, overlooking their offenses, О Master. 
Theotokion: Appearing, with thine enlightenment, dispel the clouds of utter 
darkness from my soul, О Virgin who hast given birth to the Sun of 
righteousness. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: The instruments of music sounded out in harmony, * and countless 
multitudes worshipped the image in Dura; * but the three Children, 
refusing to bow in obeisance, * hymn and glorify the Lord throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Having passed through the struggles of earth, the true martyrs 
received heavenly crowns, and without ceasing they cry unto Thee: Hymn the 
Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages! 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: Descending into the nethermost pit, with Thy life-creating 
hand Thou didst raise up those who abode in the graves, and gavest rest unto Thy 
servants who reposed aforetime in the faith, О Compassionate One. 
Glory ..., In that Thou art the Wellspring of life everlasting and the Torrent of 
delight, grant that Thy servants, who have departed unto Thee, may hymn and 
glorify Thee throughout all ages. 
Theotokion: О Virgin Mary, Theotokos, who hast given birth in the flesh to 
God, the Savior of mankind: Save those who with faith hymn and supremely exalt 
thine Offspring throughout all ages. 
We then chant the hymn of the Theotokos (the Magnificat), with the 
refrain: “More honorable than the cherubim ...,” and make prostrations. 
ODE IX 
Canon of all the righteous 
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of God 
Most High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and who beyond 
comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given birth to God.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
The martyrs stood before the unjust tribunals, condemning all injustice by the 
grace of Christ, rescuing those held fast by them, and receiving crowns of 
righteousness. 
Ye were shown to be pilots of the Church, piously steering the whole ship 
with the commandments of God, О all ye blessed primates and pastors. 
Wherefore, we honor you as our helmsmen. 
The councils of the prophets and the venerable entreat Thee, О Lord, and the 
companies of women who most splendidly suffered and shone forth in asceticism, 
beseech Thee, О Lover of mankind: Grant us Thy compassions! 
О Merciful One, through the supplications of Thy saints grant that Thy 
servants, who have departed in faith from this vain world, may have a share in the 
honor and everlasting glory which all the saints of Christ have been granted. 
Theotokion: Bearing in thine arms the Fullness of all good things, О all-
immaculate one, fulfill the entreaties of thy servants; and direct our steps toward 
God, giving us the strength to walk in virtue. 
Canon of the reposed 
Irmos: Every ear is awestruck at hearing of God's ineffable condescension, 
* for the Most High voluntarily descended and assumed flesh, * becoming 
man in the Virgin's womb; * wherefore we the faithful magnify the most 
pure Theotokos. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the martyrs: Possessed of invincible and unvanquishable might, О martyrs 
of Christ, ye set at naught the ungodly edicts of the tyrants and, enlightened by the 
rays of the Trinity, О right glorious ones, ye were manifestly deemed worthy of 
the kingdom of heaven. 
Refrain: Grant rest, О Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
For the reposed: Bitter Hades was destroyed when Thou didst demolish it and 
raise up those who slept there from all ages. О Compassionate One, in that Thou 
art good, grant Thy never-waning light to those who have now passed over to 
Thee. 
Glory ..., О Savior, Thou art all sweetness, Thou art truly all desire, all 
insatiable love; Thou art all ineffable beauty! Wherefore, be Thou well-pleased that 
those who have passed over to Thee may delight in Thy comeliness, and grant 
unto them Thy divine beauty. 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Theotokion: Save me, О Mother of God, who hast given birth to Christ my 
Savior, God and man, in two natures but a single Hypostasis: He is the only-
begotten of the Father, and issued forth from thee as the firstborn of all creation. 
Him do we magnify in two natures. 
Then, “It is truly meet to bless thee ...,” and a prostration.  
Small litany, Exapostilarion, and the usual psalms. 
On the Praises, these Stichera of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the martyrs: Ye struggled greatly, О saints, valiantly enduring tortures at the 
hands of the iniquitous; and though ye have passed from this life, ye still work 
wonders in this world and heal those made sick by their passions. О holy ones, 
pray ye that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
O invincible martyrs of Christ, having triumphed over delusion by the power 
of the Cross, and gained as your reward the grace of eternal life. Ye feared not the 
threats of tyrants, and suffering tortures ye rejoiced; and now your blood hath 
become for us the healing of our souls, pray ye that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
Having clothed yourselves with the breastplate of the Faith, and armed 
yourselves with the Cross as a sword, ye showed yourselves to be mighty warriors, 
bravely opposing the tyrants and casting down the delusion of the devil; and, 
victorious, ye were deemed worthy of crowns. Pray ye ever on our behalf, that our 
souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
For the reposed: For those who have lived in fornication infinite is the 
torment, the gnashing of teeth, the inconsolable weeping, the fiery Gehenna, the 
outer darkness, the worm which sleepeth not, the ineffectual tears, and the im-
placable judgment; wherefore, before the end let us cry aloud, saying: О Master 
Christ, grant rest with the elect unto those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: I flee to thy protection, О holy Virgin Theotokos, for I know that 
through thee I shall obtain salvation; for thou art able to help me, О pure one. 
 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Small Doxology (Read), Litany: Let us complete ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the departed, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Dipping Thy fingers in Thy blood and staining them therewith as with red ink, 
Thou hast signed for us a royal reprieve, О Master; wherefore, we entreat Thee 
with faith: Among Thy firstborn number those who have departed unto Thee, the 
tenderly compassionate One, and grant that they may receive the joy of Thy 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. 
Having fulfilled Thy priestly ministry as a man, and been sacrificed as a lamb, 
Thou didst redeem mankind from corruption, offering Thyself as an oblation to 
the Father. As Thou art the Lover of mankind, do Thou enroll the departed in the 
land of the living, where torrents of delight pour forth, and well-springs of eternal 
life flow. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
O Thou Who, in the depths of Thine ineffable wisdom, dost set the bounds of 
life, and foresee things to come, cause the servants whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself to dwell in the life to come. Settle them, by peaceful waters, in the 
splendor of the saints, О Lord, where the voice of joy and praise is heard. 
Verse: Their memorial * is from generation to generation. 
О Word Who art invisible, of the same nature and form as the Father and the 
Spirit, for my sake Thou didst appear as a man in the flesh. In that Thou art 
merciful and lovest mankind, with the beauties of Thy majesty and comeliness 
enlighten those who have passed from this life, О Author of life. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: In that thou didst conceive the beginningless Word of God the 
Father, with thy maternal boldness earnestly entreat Him, О Theotokos, that He 
number thy servants where the jubilation of the righteous who rejoice and praise 
thee, is continuous, and where the radiance is eternal, and the voice of him who 
keepeth festival is sweet. 
Then, “It is good to give thanks ...,” Trisagion ..., Our Father ..., Troparia. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., First Hour, and Dismissal. 
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
ON SATURDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes, these Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
Remember us, О Christ, Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember the 
thief on the tree; and grant unto all Thy heavenly kingdom, О only 
Compassionate One. 
О passion-bearers who endured all pain, by your wounds and divine grace ye 
have wounded all the darkness of the demons. 
The venerable and divine hierarchs of Christ, the council of the prophets, and 
all the righteous saints, have received a heavenly inheritance. Let us bless them as 
is meet. 
All who have departed this life with faith do thou settle in the lands of the 
righteous, О God; and show forth as heirs of paradise those who hymn Thee in a 
godly manner. 
Glory ..., I offer Thee a final hymn, О Trinity: Those whom Thou hast taken 
from us in faith do Thou grant the habitations of the saints; and have mercy on 
me, the prodigal. 
Both now ..., О Virgin who hast given birth to the Fullness of all good things, 
fulfill our supplications, asking for us remission offenses, enlightenment and great 
mercy. 
 
On Saturday, the Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, * O ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
And for the Departed, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
 
Alleluia, in Tone IV: The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
 Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, but the Lord shall deliver 
them out of them all. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
 Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
Another, for the departed: 
Communion Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to 
Thyself, O Lord. Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 
 
AND THUS CONCLUDES THE HOLY OKTOECHOS, TO THE GLORY 
OF THE MOST HOLY CONSUBSTANIAL TRINITY. 
