--- PAGE 1 ---
TONE ONE 
ON SATURDAY EVENING 
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera: 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins; 
* because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world.  
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins; 
* because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to him 
who in her midst hath arisen from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and hath 
delivered us from our iniquities. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Come O ye peoples, * let us hymn and worship Christ * glorifying his 
Resurrection from the dead: * for he is our God, ** who hath redeemed the world 
from the deception of the adversary. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O my brethren! * let us celebrate today a pure festival, * Let creation leap for 
joy, * let mankind dance, for the holy Theotokos hath called us together, * the 
unsullied treasury of virginity, * the rational Paradise of the second Adam, * the 
temple of the union of the two natures, * the solemn festival of the salvific 
reconciliation, * the bridal chamber in which the Word hath wedded the flesh, * 
the illumined cloud which truly carried incarnate Him who rideth upon the 
cherubim. * By her intercessions, O Christ God, ** do Thou save our souls.  
Then “O Joyous Light ...,”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,”:  
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone I:  
By thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by thy 
Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be to 
thee. 
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation. 
Thou hast been glorified in generations and generations, * O Mary, maiden, 
virgin mother and Theotokos, * the protection of the world, * who hast given 
birth in the flesh to the Son of the Father * who hath no beginning; * the Son 
who is truly co-eternal with the Spirit. ** Implore Him that we may be saved. 
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget 
thine own people and thy father’s house. 
We who are held fast by unseen afflictions * and have gained thee as our only 
protection, * O pure Virgin, * cry aloud to thee with thanksgiving: * Save us, all-
holy Bride of God; ** for thou art the refuge of the world and the assistance of 
our race. 
Verse: The rich among the people * shall entreat thy countenance. 
The world hath been renewed by thy childbearing, * O most pure maiden 
Birthgiver of God, * salvation of the faithful and unsleeping protector * of those 
who devoutly ask thee: * Cease not to intercede unceasingly ** on behalf of those 
who sing thy praises. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The prophet named thee O Virgin, a Cloud of everlasting light, * for the Word 
of the Father, Christ our God, * came forth from thee like dew upon the fleece * 
and dawning from thee, * He hath enlightened the world and destroyed deception. 
* Cease not to intercede we pray thee, * O most holy Lady, ** for us who confess 
thee to be the true Theotokos. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I: 
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding 
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting 
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O 
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. ** 
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
And the Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the 
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank. 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of sins; 
* because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to him 
who in her midst hath arisen from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and hath 
delivered us from our iniquities. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Come O ye peoples, * let us hymn and worship Christ * glorifying his 
Resurrection from the dead: * for he is our God, ** who hath redeemed the world 
from the deception of the adversary. 
Other Stichera, by Anatolius: 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Rejoice, O ye heavens! * Sound the trumpets O ye foundations of the earth! * 
O ye mountains thunder forth your joy! * for behold, Emmanuel hath nailed our 
sins to the Cross, * and the giver of life, hath slain death * raising up Adam, ** as 
He alone is the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Let us sing the praise of him * who was willingly crucified in the flesh for our 
sakes, * suffered and was buried, and arose from the dead, * as we cry: * 
“Establish Thy Church in Orthodox belief, O Christ, * and grant peace unto our 
lives, ** as Thou alone art good and the Lover of mankind.” 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
As we the unworthy ones stand before Thy life-bearing tomb * we offer a 
hymn of glory * to thine ineffable compassion, O Christ our God; * because Thou 
didst accept the Cross and death, * O sinless one, * that Thou mightest grant 
resurrection to the world, ** as Thou alone lovest mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
Let us sing the praises of the Word, * without beginning and co-eternal, with 
the Father, * who came forth ineffably from a virgin womb, * willingly accepting 
the Cross and Death for our sake * and arose in glory, * wherefore we cry aloud: * 
“Giver of life, O Lord, glory be to thee, ** the Savior of our souls.” 
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and 
who gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the hymn 
of the Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been 
revealed as the Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle 
wall, she hath brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * Therefore, 
holding fast to her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as our champion 
the Lord born from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, O ye people of 
God; ** for as the Invincible one he shall conquer our adversaries. 
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone I: 
By Thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by 
Thy Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be to 
thee. 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
All ye His creation rejoice! * let the heavens be glad, * let the nations clap their 
hands with gladness; * for Christ our Savior hath nailed our sins to the Cross * 
and by slaying death hath granted us life eternal, * raising all of the fallen race of 
Adam, ** as he alone is the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
Being the King of heaven and earth, * O Incomprehensible one, * Thou wast 
willingly crucified through Thy love for mankind; * when Hades met thee he was 
vexed, * while the souls of the righteous receiving thee below rejoiced, * and 
Adam, seeing thee his Creator in the nethermost regions, rose again. * O the 
wonder! * How did the life of all taste death? * Except that he wished to enlighten 
the world, * which crieth out saying: * “O Thou who didst arise from the dead, ** 
O Lord glory be to thee!” 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days. 
Carrying sweet spices the myrrh-bearing women * reached Thy tomb with 
haste, lamenting; * and not finding Thy most pure Body, * but learning from the 
angel the new and marvelous wonder, * spake unto the apostles saying: * The 
Lord hath arisen, ** granting the world His great mercy. 
 Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Behold, the prophecy of Isaiah hath been fulfilled, * for a Virgin hath given 
birth, * and after giving birth hath remained a Virgin as before. * For it was God 
who was born from her; * therefore He began nature anew. * O Mother of God, 
disdain not the supplications of Thy servants, * which are offered unto thee in 
Thy temple; * since thou didst bear the Compassionate one in thine embrace, ** 
have pity on Thy servants, and beseech Him that our souls be saved. 
 “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then: 
Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, Full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, ** 
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...,” 
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast 
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O 
Theotokos and Virgin ...,” (Twice), and the Troparion of the Feast (Once). 
And the Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once): 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I: 
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding 
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting 
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O 
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. ** 
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone I: 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all 
became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous 
David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having 
borne thy Creator. * Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to 
Him Who came forth from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy 
birthgiving. 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT MATINS 
On “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I: 
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding 
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting 
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O 
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. ** 
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. (Twice)  
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise; Glory ..., Both now ..., The 
Theotokion, in Tone I, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion): 
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all 
became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous 
David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having 
borne thy Creator. * Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to 
Him Who came forth from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy 
birthgiving 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), the Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone I: 
While watching Thy grave, the soldiers * became as dead men from the 
lightning flash of the angel * who appeared and proclaimed to the Women the 
Resurrection. * We glorify Thee, the destroyer of corruption; * we fall down 
before Thee, * who hath risen from the grave ** and who alone art our God. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
Thou wast willingly nailed to the Cross, * O Compassionate one, * and laid in 
a tomb as a mortal, * O Giver of life. * By Thy death, O Powerful one, * Thou 
hast smashed its might; * for Hades’ gatekeepers trembled before Thee; * Thou 
hast raised with Thee the dead from every age, ** for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
All we who with love flee for refuge to thy goodness * know thee to be the 
Mother of God * and after childbirth still truly Virgin; * for we sinners have thee 
as our protection; * we have thee as our salvation in misfortunes, ** as the only 
All-immaculate one. 
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III),  
The Sessional Hymns of the Resurrection, in Tone I: 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The women came to Thy tomb at dawn * and seeing a vision of an angel they 
trembled; * the tomb became resplendent with life; * and amazed by the miracle, * 
they returned to the disciples and proclaimed the Resurrection: * for Christ hath 
despoiled Hades, * as alone almighty and all powerful, * raising up those in 
corruption, * dispelling the fear of condemnation ** by the power of the Cross. 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
O Life of all, Thou wast nailed to the Cross; * O immortal Lord, Thou wast 
numbered among the dead, * arising on the third day, O Savior, * raising Adam 
from corruption; * wherefore the heavenly Powers cried out to Thee: * “O Giver 
of life, * Glory to Thy sufferings, O Christ; * glory to Thy Resurrection; * glory to 
Thy condescension, ** O only Lover of mankind.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O Mary, holy tabernacle of the Master, * raise us up who have fallen into the 
pit of wicked despair, * of transgressions and afflictions; * for thou art the 
salvation, * the help and the mighty protection of sinners, ** and thou dost save 
thy servants. 
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses): 
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia, 
alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy 
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays, 
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon ...,”) 
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the 
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the 
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a Great 
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos. 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself 
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said 
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; * 
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, 
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, 
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, 
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living 
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy 
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O 
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from 
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God 
and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany and: 
The Sessional Hymn: 
The Thief’s repentance plundered Paradise, * but the myrrh-bearers’ 
lamentations announced the joy that Thou hast risen, * O Christ God, ** granting 
the world great mercy. 
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon: 
When I am afflicted, * I cry unto Thee, O Lord, ** hearken unto my pains. 
For those who dwell in the desert * the longing for God never ceases, ** for 
they are far from the vanity of this world. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
To the Holy Spirit, as to the Father and the Son, * are due honor and glory; ** 
thus let us sing to the Trinity, a single power. 
2nd Antiphon: 
Having lifted me up to the summit of Thy laws, * make me shine with virtues, 
O God, ** that I may sing Thy praises. 
Take me with Thy right hand, O Word, * guard me and keep me, ** lest the 
fire of sin scorch me. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
In the Holy Spirit all creation is made new * and hastens back to its original 
condition; ** for He is equal in strength to the Father and the Word. 
3rd Antiphon: 
With those who said unto me: * “Let us journey to the courts of the Lord,” ** 
my Spirit was gladdened and my heart rejoiceth. 
In the house of David is great fear; * for when the thrones are set therein, ** 
all the tribes and nations of the earth will be judged. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
To the Holy Spirit must be offered honor, adoration, glory and power, * as 
befits also the Father and the Son; ** for the Trinity is a Unity, one in essence, but 
not in Hypostases. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: Now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will establish 
them in salvation, * I will be manifest therein. 
The Verse: The words of the Lord are pure words, silver that is fired, tried 
in the earth, brought to sevenfold purity. 
Let every breath ...,  
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath 
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * 
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O Merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassions, ** blot out my transgressions. 
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, 
** and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” Then the Canons: 
Resurrection Canon Tone I.  
ODE I 
Irmos: Thy victorious right arm, * in a manner befitting God, * hath been 
glorified in strength, O Immortal One; * for in its infinite strength it 
shattered the enemy, * fashioning anew a path for the Israelites through the 
deep. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
As God, working with immaculate hands, Thou hast fashioned me in the 
beginning from dust, and now stretching out those hands on the Cross, Thou 
didst recall from the earth my corruptible body, which Thou hast taken from the 
Virgin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
He, who by divinely breathing upon me placed a soul in me, hath willingly 
submitted to be slain for me and thus delivering his soul to death hath freed my 
soul from the eternal bonds, raising it with Himself, and glorifying it with 
incorruption. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice! source of grace, Rejoice! ladder and gate of heaven, 
Rejoice! lamp-stand and golden jar, the un-hewn mountain, that bore unto the 
world, Christ the Giver of life. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Christ’s incarnation maketh me divine, Christ’s humility exalteth me, and by 
suffering the passion in the flesh, Christ the Giver of life maketh me 
dispassionate, wherefore I sing a hymn of thanksgiving, for He hath been 
glorified. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Having endured crucifixion, Christ exalteth me, having put death to death, 
Christ hath raised me up with himself, granting me life, wherefore I clap my hands 
in gladness singing a song of victory to the Savior, for gloriously hath He been 
glorified. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Most pure Virgin, thou hast conceived God, and in virginity, 
thou hast given birth to Christ incarnate from thee, in person the one and only-
begotten Son, known in two natures, for He is glorified. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
What hymn worthy of thee can our weakness offer unto thee? If not only the 
joyful one Gabriel revealed unto us: “Rejoice! O Theotokos, Virgin Mother who 
knewest not wedlock!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Unto the Ever-virgin and Mother of the King of the highest Powers, let us the 
faithful cry in spirit from hearts most pure: “Rejoice! O Theotokos, Virgin Mother 
who knewest not wedlock!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Immeasurable is the abyss of thine incomprehensible child-bearing, O all-pure 
one; therefore with undoubting faith we offer thee our song: “Rejoice! O 
Theotokos, Virgin Mother who knewest not wedlock!” 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Thou alone knowest the weakness of human nature * and in 
compassion hast assumed its form; * do Thou gird me with power from on 
high, * that I may cry unto Thee: * Holy is the animate temple of Thine 
ineffable glory, O Lover of mankind! 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
As Thou art my God, O Good one, Thou hast taken compassion upon me, 
fallen as I was, deigning to come down to me, and exalting me through Thy 
crucifixion that I may cry unto Thee: “Holy art Thou the Lord of glory, in 
goodness beyond compare!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
O Christ, as the hypostatic Life and as compassionate God, Thou hast clothed 
Thyself with me, the corrupted one, descending, O Master, unto the dust of death, 
destroying the power of death, and arising on the third day, whereby Thou hast 
clothed me with incorruption. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having conceived God in thy womb, O Virgin, by the Most holy 
Spirit, thou hast remained unburned, like the bush that burnt before Moses the 
lawgiver yet remained unburned, clearly foretelling of thee who received the 
unendurable fire. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
To Christ God, who took the wandering sheep upon his shoulders and 
through a tree destroyed his sin, let us cry aloud: “Thou Who hast exalted the 
horn of Thy faithful, Holy art thou, O Lord!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Unto Him who brought up from Hades Christ the great shepherd and by his 
priestly power, through the apostles, shepherded in wisdom all the nations, let us 
in truth by the divine Spirit give adoration. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Unto the Son who without seed wast willingly incarnate from a 
Virgin, and who by his divine power kept her a pure Virgin after child-bearing, to 
the God of all, let us cry aloud: “Holy art thou, O Lord!” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Truthfully, O Virgin, following the words of the prophet, we name thee the 
light cloud; for from thee the Lord hath come to overthrow the idols of Egypt, 
made by men, and to enlighten those who served them. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The choir of prophets hath truly named thee the sealed fountain and the shut 
gate, clearly depicting for us the symbols of thy virginity, O All-praised one, which 
Thou didst preserve even after childbirth. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O all-immaculate Virgin, Gabriel, enabled as far as is possible to know the 
mind of God, brought thee a message of great gladness, plainly disclosing the 
conception of the Word, and proclaiming thine ineffable childbirth.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Perceiving thee with prophetic eyes * as the mountain 
overshadowed by the grace of God, * Habbakuk proclaimed that the Holy 
One of Israel * would come forth from thee, * for our salvation and 
restoration. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Who is this Savior that cometh from Edom, wearing a crown of thorns, His 
garments reddened, and hanging on a tree? He is the Holy one of Israel, who hath 
come for our salvation and restoration. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Behold, O ye disobedient people, and be ashamed! For He whom ye in your 
madness begged Pilate to hang upon a cross as a malefactor hath abolished the 
power of death, and in a manner befitting God, arisen from the tomb. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We know thee to be the tree of life, O Virgin; for it was not the 
fruit which bringeth death that budded from thee, but rather the delight of eternal 
life and the salvation of us who hymn thee. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Who is this fair one from Edom, His garments dyed scarlet with the grapes of 
Bosor? He is as comely as God and as a mortal He hath reddened his robe with 
the blood of His flesh. To Him we the faithful sing: “Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Christ, appearing as a high priest of the blessings to come, hath destroyed our 
sin, and showing a strange way by His blood, hath hastened unto a greater and 
more perfect tabernacle, and is thus our guide into that Holy Place. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou didst pay the ancient debt of Eve, O All-praised one, by the 
new Adam who hath come forth for our sake. For uniting to himself from a pure 
conception rational and living flesh, Christ came forth from thee, as one Lord in 
both natures. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Hear wonders, O heaven, take note, O earth, for a daughter of the earthly, 
fallen Adam hath been declared the Mother of God and of her Creator, for our 
salvation and restoration. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
We praise Thy great and awesome mystery; for unknown to the Commanders 
of the armies beyond this world, the One Who hath descended upon thee, like 
dew upon the fleece, O All-praised one, hath done so for our salvation and 
restoration. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O All-praised Theotokos, Holy of Holies, expectation of the nations, and the 
salvation of the faithful, from thee hath dawned the Redeemer and Giver of life 
and our Lord. Entreat him that thy servants may be saved.  
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Thou hast shone upon us with the radiance * of Thy coming O 
Christ, * and illumined the ends of the world with Thy Cross, * 
enlighten with the light of thine understanding * the hearts of those 
who with right worship hymn Thee.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The Jews put to death on the Tree of the Cross the great shepherd and Lord; 
but from death’s might He hath rescued like sheep the dead buried in Hades. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou didst announce the glad tidings of peace by Thy cross and 
proclaimed deliverance for captives, O my Savior, then didst Thou, O Christ, put 
to shame him who held them captive revealing him as naked and destitute by Thy 
divine arising. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O All-praised one, despise not the prayers of those who faithfully 
entreat thee, but accept them, O Pure one, and convey them to thy Son, our God 
and only benefactor; for in thee we have acquired a protectress. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O the riches and depth of the wisdom of God! The Lord who snareth the wise 
hath ransomed us from their trickery; for having suffered willingly in the 
feebleness of the flesh, He hath been raised from the dead by His own life-giving 
strength. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Being God, Christ united Himself to flesh for our sake, and hath been 
crucified, and died, and hath been buried, and arisen again, ascending up to the 
Father with His own flesh, with which He will come again to save those who 
devoutly serve Him. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Pure Virgin, Holy of Holies, Thou hast given birth to the Holy 
one of the Holy, who sanctifieth all, Christ the Redeemer, wherefore we proclaim 
thee as the Queen and Sovereign Lady of all, as the Mother of the Creator of all 
that is. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Beholding thee, the Powers of heaven are made glad, and with them rejoiceth 
the assemblies of mortals; for they have been united, O Virgin Theotokos, by 
thine offspring; whom we worthily glorify. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Let every mortal tongue and mind be roused to the praise of mortal man’s true 
adornment; the Virgin clearly standeth by the Lord, glorifying those who with 
faith sing the praises of her wonders. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Every song and every praise of the wise offered to the Virgin and Theotokos 
is worthy of praise, for she hath become the temple of the most high glory of 
God; whom as is fitting, we glorify. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The deepest abyss hath surrounded us, * and there is none to 
deliver us, * yea we have been counted as sheep for the slaughter; * save 
Thy people O our God, * for Thou art the strength and restoration of the 
weak. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Through the transgression of the first-formed man, O Lord, we were 
grievously wounded; but by Thy wounds, by which Thou wast afflicted for our 
sakes, O Christ, we have been healed; for Thou art the strength and restoration of 
the feeble. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Thou hast led us up from Hades, O Lord, by destroying the all-devouring 
whale of the deep, O All-powerful one, and destroying his power by Thy might; 
for Thou art the life and the light and the resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The Forefathers of mankind rejoice in thee, immaculate Virgin, 
for through thee they regain Eden, which they had lost through transgression; for 
thou art pure both before child-bearing and after giving birth.  
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O Christ God, being dispassionate in mind and immaterial, Thou dost mingle 
with the human mind by the means of the divine nature and the coarseness of the 
flesh; and wast wholly united to the whole of me without change, that by being 
crucified Thou mightest hand salvation to the whole of me, who had fallen. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Having tripped, Adam hath fallen and been crushed, cheated of his hope of 
deification, but the new Adam hath arisen, deified by the union of the Word, and 
by the Passion gaining dispassion, He is glorified as the Son enthroned with the 
Father and the Spirit. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Not leaving the bosom of His Begetter, Who is without 
beginning, He lodgeth and cometh to rest in the womb of a pure maiden, He that 
is without a mother hath become incarnate without a father, the God of 
righteousness who reigneth as king, His fearful and ineffable generation is without 
genealogy.  
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The heavenly Ranks stand beside thine Offspring like servants, fittingly struck 
with amazement at thy seedless child-bearing, O Ever-virgin; for thou art pure 
both before bearing child and after giving birth. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Word, who before was without flesh, and who made the universe by His 
will, who brought the armies of the Bodiless ones into being out of nothing, as 
All-powerful, became incarnate from thee, O Most pure one. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
The foe hath been slain by thy life-bearing fruit, and Hades hath been 
trampled under foot, O thou who art Full of God’s grace, and we who were 
chained have been freed; wherefore I cry out: “Deliver me from the passions of 
my heart!” 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone I: 
Thou didst arise from the grave in glory as God * and thus raised up the world 
with Thee; * and mortal nature singeth Thy praises as God, * and death hath 
disappeared; * Adam danceth, O Master, * and now Eve, freed from her chains, * 
rejoiceth as she cries aloud: ** It is Thee, O Christ, who grantest the Resurrection 
to all. 
Ikos: Let us praise as God all-powerful the One who hath risen on the third 
day, smashing the gates of Hades and rousing the age-long dead from the grave, 
who hath appeared to the myrrh-bearers, as it was His good pleasure to say to 
them first: Rejoice! and thus revealing joy to the apostles, as alone the Giver of 
life. Therefore with faith the Women proclaim the tokens of victory to the 
Disciples; Hades groaneth, Death lamenteth, the world exulteth and all rejoice 
together; for Thou, O Christ, hast granted the Resurrection to all. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: We the faithful perceive thee, O Theotokos, * to be a noetic furnace; 
* for as He, the supremely exalted One, * saved the three children, * so 
hath He wholly refashioned fallen humanity, in thy womb, * O Thou 
praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The earth did shudder, the sun was hidden, and light was enveloped in 
darkness, the sacred veil of the Temple was rent in twain and the rocks were rent 
asunder; for the Just One hath tasted death upon the cross; O Thou praised and 
supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou, the highly exalted one, didst willingly become as one helpless and 
slain among the dead for our sakes, Thou didst set us all free, and with a lofty arm, 
didst raise us up together with Thee, O Thou praised and supremely glorified God 
of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Theotokion: Rejoice, spring of eternal water! Rejoice, Paradise of delight! 
Rejoice, wall of the faithful! Rejoice, Bride who kneweth not wedlock! Rejoice, joy 
of all the world! through whom the God of our fathers hath dawned unto us, 
praised and glorified above all. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Of old the earth was cursed, made crimson with the blood of Abel by the 
murdering hand of a brother; but bedewed by Thy divine blood it is blessed and 
leaping for joy crieth out: “O God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Let the people of the Jews, opposed to God, lament the reckless deed of 
putting Christ to death; but let the gentiles be glad and clap their hands and cry 
aloud: “O God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Lo, the dazzling angel crieth out to the myrrh-bearing Women, “Come, see the 
tokens of Christ’s Resurrection, the graves clothes and the tomb, and cry aloud: O 
God of our Fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Jacob prophetically discerned thee in the ladder, O Theotokos; for through 
thee the Highly Exalted was well-pleased to appear and make His abode among 
mankind: O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Rejoice, Adam’s most revered fleece! The Shepherd, the highly exalted One, 
came forth from thee, truly clothed in my whole nature, through His ineffable 
compassion: O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
God Who is before all ages hath truly become the new Adam from thy pure 
blood; beseech him now to make me, who am old and worn out, renewed as I cry: 
“O Thou praised and supremely glorified God of our fathers.” 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In the furnace as in a fiery smelter * the Israelite children shone 
more brightly than gold * with the beauty of godliness, * as they exclaimed: 
Bless the Lord all ye his works, * hymn and exalt him supremely 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Word of God, Thou Who by Thy will maketh and transformeth all things, 
by Thy Passion Thou hast transformed the shadow of death into everlasting life, 
wherefore we and all Thy works unceasingly praise Thee as Lord, and supremely 
exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
By rising on the third day, O Christ, Thou hast destroyed the misery and 
destruction within the gates and strongholds of Hades. Unceasingly all Thy works 
praise Thee as Lord, and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Let us praise her who without seed and beyond nature brought 
forth Christ the precious pearl from the divine flesh crying: “All ye His works 
bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Come, O ye peoples, let us worship the place upon which stood Christ’s 
immaculate feet, and where His divine, life-giving palms were stretched out on the 
Tree for the salvation of all mortals; and let us circle the tomb of life, singing, “Let 
all creation bless the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The lawless slander of the Jews who slew God hath been refuted; for He 
Whom they called a deceiver, hath been raised as all-powerful, making a mockery 
of the seals of the lawless ones. Wherefore rejoicing let us sing: “Let all creation 
bless the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The most pure seraphim, as they praise the glory of the one lordship in thrice-
holy hymns, like free slaves glorify with fear the three-hypostatic Godhead. With 
them we also devoutly sing, “Let all creation bless the Lord, and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages.” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Let us all hymn the praise of the resplendent Bridal Chamber, from which 
Christ, the Master of all, came forth as a bridegroom, as we sing: “All ye His 
works bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Rejoice!, glorious throne of God! Rejoice! wall of the faithful, through whom 
Christ, the light, hath dawned for those in darkness, who call Thee blest and cry: 
“All ye His works bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Cause of our salvation, who bore the Lord, Virgin all-praised, intercede for all 
who devoutly cry: “All ye His works bless the Lord, praise and supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages.” 
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant: 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
And then the appointed Katavasia: 
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat: 
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, ** the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable … 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * 
as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
ODE IX 
Irmos: The Bush, which burnt without being consumed, * prefigured thy 
pure birthgiving, O Theotokos. * Wherefore we now entreat Thee: * 
quench the raging furnace of temptations that beset us, * that we may 
unceasingly magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O how the lawless and disobedient people, having plotted evil, justified the 
ungodly malefactor, but condemned the Just Lord of glory to the Tree! Him we 
fittingly magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
We glorify Thee O Savior, the blameless Lamb who taketh away the sins of the 
world, risen on the third day, and Who with the Father and the divine Spirit we 
acknowledge as God, and the Lord of glory, Thee do we magnify. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Save Thy people, O Lord, whom Thou hast purchased with 
Thine own precious blood, strengthening all Orthodox Christians against enemies, 
and bestowing peace upon Thy Churches, O Lover of mankind, through the 
supplications of the Theotokos. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thy Cross, O Lord, hath been glorified with ineffable power; for Thy 
weakness was revealed as transcending all power. Through it the powerful have 
been cast down to the earth, while paupers have been raised safely to heaven. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Our froward death hath been slain, for when Thou didst appear to those in 
Hades, O Christ, Thou didst grant unto them resurrection from the dead, 
wherefore as the life, resurrection and hypostatic light, we magnify Thee in hymns. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The nature that is beginningless and infinite is acknowledged in three single 
divine Hypostases; as one Godhead in Father, Son and Spirit, trusting in which 
the wise in God are saved. 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Virgin, fulfilling prophecy, thou didst spring from David’s root; yet in giving 
birth to the Lord of glory Who hath been foretold by the prophet David, and 
Whom we fittingly magnify, thou hast also glorified him. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O most pure one, every law of praise is defeated by the majesty of thy glory; 
yet, O Lady, graciously accept from us Thine unworthy suppliants, O Theotokos, 
the praise we offer thee with love. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O what wonders are Thy passing all understanding! For thou, O Virgin, alone 
brighter than the sun, hast granted unto all to contemplate the newest wonder of 
thine incomprehensible birth-giving O all-pure one, wherefore we all magnify 
thee. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...,”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion (Svetilen). 
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to 
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the 
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion. 
On the Aposticha: “Let every breath ...,” 8 Stichera of the Resurrection, 
however, if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from 
the Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses. 
On the Aposticha, the Resurrection Stichera, in Tone I: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
We sing the praise of Thy saving Passion, * O Christ, ** and we glorify Thy 
Resurrection. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
Having endured the Cross, * and destroyed death * and risen from the dead, * 
grant peace to our lives, O Lord, ** as Thou alone art All-powerful. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Having despoiled Hades * and raised mankind by Thy Resurrection, O Christ, 
** grant that with pure hearts we may praise and glorify Thee. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
As we glorify Thy divine condescension, * we praise Thee, O Christ: * For 
Thou wast born of a Virgin, * yet Thou wast not separated from the Father; * as 
man Thou didst suffer and willingly endure the Cross; * arising from the grave, * 
as though coming forth from Thy bridal chamber, * that Thou mightest save the 
world. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee! 
Other Stichera by Anatolius: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
When Thou wast nailed to the Tree of the Cross, * then the might of the 
enemy was slain; * creation shook in fear of Thee, * and Hades was despoiled by 
Thy might. * Thou hast raised the dead from their tombs * and opened Paradise 
unto the Thief. ** O Christ our God, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Lamenting, the holy women came with haste to Thy grave; * but finding the 
tomb opened and learning from the angel * the new and marvelous wonder, * 
they announced to the apostles, ** “The Lord hath arisen, granting the world His 
great mercy.” 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
We bow down before the divine stripes of Thy passion, * O Christ God, * and 
the royal sacrifice that took place divinely revealed in Zion at the end of the ages; 
* for Thou, the Sun of righteousness, * hast enlightened those who slept in 
darkness, * leading them to the never-setting radiance, ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee! 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
O Tumultuous race of the Jews, give ear. * Where are those who approached 
Pilate? * Let the soldiers who kept watch say, * where are the seals of the grave? * 
To where hath the one who was buried been moved? * Where hath the One who 
is not for sale been sold? * How hath the treasure been burgled? * O Lawless 
Jews, why do ye slander the Rising of the Crucified? * He hath arisen, as one free 
among the dead, ** and granteth unto the world His great mercy. 
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel  

--- PAGE 25 ---
Note: If the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ the Eothinon is taken from 
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve 
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise 
we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, 
glory be to thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion. 
Today is salvation come unto the world; * let us sing praises to Him that arose 
from the tomb, * and is the Author of our life. * For, having destroyed death by 
death, ** He hath given us the victory and great mercy. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE I 
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes. 
Through food the foe led Adam out of Paradise; but through the Cross Christ 
led back the Thief as he cried: Remember me when Thou comest in Thy 
kingdom.  
I venerate Thy sufferings and I glorify Thy Resurrection; with Adam and with 
the Thief I cry aloud with radiant voice: Remember me, O Lord, when Thou 
comest in Thy Kingdom. 
Thou wast crucified, O sinless one, and willingly laid in a grave, but Thou 
didst arise as God; raising Adam with Thyself as he cried: Remember me when 
Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. 
Raising the temple of Thy body after Thy burial for three days, O Christ God, 
Thou hast raised with Adam those who came from Adam as they cried: 
Remember me when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. 
The myrrh-bearers came weeping to Thy grave, O Christ God, very early in 
the morning, and found an angel sitting clothed in white, who cried: What do ye 
seek? Christ hath arisen, mourn no longer. 
Thine apostles, O Lord, coming to the mountain that Thou, O Savior, hadst 
appointed them, saw Thee and worshipped Thee. And Thou didst send them out 
to teach the nations and baptize the inhabitants therein. 
Let us all worship the Father and glorify the Son, and with them praise the 
most holy Spirit, as we cry and say: O all-holy Trinity, save us all.  
Theotokion: Thy people, O Christ, bring unto Thee Thy Mother to intercede 
on their behalf; at her supplications, O good One, grant us Thy compassion, that 
we may glorify Thee, who dawned for us from the tomb. 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone I: 
When the stone had been sealed by the Jews, * And the soldiers were guarding 
Thine immaculate Body, * Thou didst arise on the third day, O Savior, * granting 
life unto the world. * Wherefore, the Hosts of the Heavens cried out to Thee, O 
Life-giver: * Glory to Thy Resurrection, O Christ. * Glory to Thy kingdom. ** 
Glory to Thy dispensation, O only Lover of mankind. 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone I:  
Thou didst arise from the grave in glory as God * and thus raised up the world 
with Thee; * and mortal nature singeth Thy praises as God, * and death hath 
disappeared; * Adam danceth, O Master, * and now Eve, freed from her chains, * 
rejoiceth as she cries aloud: ** It is Thee, O Christ, who grantest the Resurrection 
to all. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone I: Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, * according 
as we have hoped in Thee. 
Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; praise is meet for the upright.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone I: O God who givest avengement unto me, and hast 
subdued peoples under me.  
Verse: Who magnifieth the salvation of His king, and worketh mercy for 
His anointed, for David, and for his seed unto eternity. 
  
