--- PAGE 1 ---
TONE EIGHT 
SATURDAY EVENING:  
AT LITTLE VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 4 Stichera: 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
We offer unto Thee, O Christ, * an evening hymn and spiritual worship; * 
because Thou wast well-pleased to have mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
We offer unto Thee, O Christ, * an evening hymn and spiritual worship; * 
because Thou wast well-pleased to have mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
O Lord, cast us not away * from Thy presence; * but be well-pleased to have 
mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Rejoice holy Zion, * Mother of the Churches, * dwelling-place of God; * for it 
was thee who first received forgiveness of sins ** through the Resurrection. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
How shall we call thee blessed, О Theotokos? How shall we hymn the 
unapproachable mystery of thy birthgiving, О all-blessed one? For the Creator of 
the ages and Fashioner of our nature, taking pity on His image, lowered Himself 
in an inscrutable self-abasement; and while He remained in the immaterial bosom 
of the Father, He made His abode in thy womb, О pure one, and immutably 
became flesh through thee, О thou who knewest not wedlock, remaining God by 
nature, as He was. Wherefore, we worship Him as perfect God and perfect man, 
One in dual form; for in Him there is truly a dual nature, and we all proclaim His 
essential characteristics to be of two kinds, according to His twofold essence, 
worshipping His two energies and wills. For, being one in essence with God the 
Father, of His own accord He willeth and acteth as God; and being of one essence 
with us, of His own accord He willeth and acteth as man. Him do thou entreat, О 
pure and most blessed one, that our souls be saved. 
Then “O Joyous Light ...,”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...,”:  

--- PAGE 2 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone VIII:  
O Jesus, having come down from heaven, * Thou didst ascend the Cross; * O 
immortal Life, Thou didst come to death; * the true Light, unto those in darkness; 
* the Resurrection unto all to those who had fallen. ** Our illumination and our 
Savior, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and generation. 
God, the Son begotten without time from the beginningless Father, * hath 
condescended to become man for the salvation of mortals * that He might now 
grant paradise to the first-formed man. * At the same time Thou, O Lord, hast 
redeemed all nature from the deceit of the serpent * and thus saved the fallen 
image. * As Thou art one Who art readily placated * Thou hast made Thy Mother 
the pure undefiled Mother of the Bridegroom, ** whom we have all gained as the 
anchor of our souls. 
Verse: Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thine ear; * and forget 
thine own people and thy father’s house. 
Thou didst hold within thy womb, * O thou blessed of God, * the incarnate 
Creator of all things, * as He refashioned mankind, * which through the serpent 
had once fallen by the transgression. * For thou hast given birth ineffably to our 
God in the flesh, * and through thy childbearing thou hast delivered from 
corruption * all creation which had grown old. * Therefore we praise and glorify 
thy grace, * O Virgin unwedded, ** we pray thee that we may be delivered from 
every punishment. 
Verse: The rich among the people of the land * will entreat Thy favor. 
Reveal to us all the multitude of thy mercies * and the limitless ocean of thy 
loving-kindness, * by wiping away the sins of thy servants. * For as thou art the 
Theotokos, O all-immaculate one, * thou hast authority over all creation, * and by 
thy power thou mayest order all things as thou dost will; * for the grace of the 
Holy Spirit clearly dwelleth within thee * and with thee, dwelleth in all things 
eternally, ** O most blessed one. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
He Whom heaven could not contain found room within thy womb without 
being circumscribed, and thou didst remain pure through the ineffable word, thy 
virginity having in nowise been defiled. For thou, alone among women, wast both 
mother and virgin; and thou alone, alone, О all-pure one, didst give the Son, the 
Bestower of life, thy milk to drink, and didst hold the never-slumbering Eye in 
thine embrace. Yet as He was before time began, He did not leave the bosom of 
the Father, but being fully God with the angels above, below He was through thee 
wholly with men, yet everywhere present, in an ineffable manner. Him do thou 
entreat, О all-holy Lady, that those who in Orthodox manner confess thee to be 
the pure Theotokos may be saved. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
From on high didst Thou descend, O compassionate One; * to burial of three 
days hast Thou submitted * that Thou mightest free us from our passions. * O 
our Life and Resurrection, O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
And the Dismissal.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT GREAT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the 
Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the Menaion service is of Polyeleos rank. 
The Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
We offer unto Thee, O Christ, * an evening hymn and spiritual worship; * 
because Thou wast well-pleased to have mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
O Lord, cast us not away * from Thy presence; * but be well-pleased to have 
mercy on us ** through the Resurrection. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Rejoice holy Zion, * Mother of the Churches, * dwelling-place of God; * for it 
was thee who first received forgiveness of sins ** through the Resurrection. 
Other Stichera, by Anatolius: 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
The Word, begotten of God the Father before all ages, * hath in the last times 
become incarnate of her who knew not wedlock, * and willingly endured the 
crucifixion and death, * and mankind, slain of old, hath thereby been saved ** 
through His own Resurrection. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
We glorify Thy Resurrection from the dead, O Christ, * through which Thou 
hast freed the race of Adam from the tyranny of Hades, * and as God hast 
granted the world eternal life ** and great mercy. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; my 
soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the Lord. 
Glory be to Thee, O Christ Savior, * only-begotten Son of God, * affixed by 
nails to the Cross and risen from the tomb ** on the third day. 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * let 
Israel hope in the Lord. 
We glorify Thee, O Lord, * and we worship Thee, O all-powerful Savior, * 
who willingly endured the Cross for our sake; * cast us not away from Thy 
presence, * but hearken unto us and save us through Thy Resurrection, ** O only 
Lover of mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Then the Stichera from the Menaion, with the following Verses: 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Glory from the Menaion, if appointed. Otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion Dogmatic: 
In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on earth * and dwelt 
among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure Virgin * and cameth 
forth from her having received human nature, * is the only Son of God, * twofold 
in nature but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming Him to be truly perfect 
God and perfect man, * we confess Christ our God. * Him do thou beseech, O 
unwedded Mother, ** that our souls find mercy!  
After the Entrance and “O Joyous Light ...,” 
Saturday Vespers Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
The Lord is King, * He is clothed with majesty. 
Verse: The Lord is clothed with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Verse: For He established the universe which shall not be shaken. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, unto length of days.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
O Christ, having descended from heaven, * Thou didst ascend the Cross; * O 
immortal Life, Thou didst descend into Hades; * the true Light, unto those in 
darkness; * the Resurrection unto all those who had fallen. ** Our illumination 
and our Savior, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: The Lord is King: He is clothed with majesty. * The Lord is clothed 
with strength and He hath girt Himself. 
Let us glorify Christ who hath risen from the dead: * for having taken a body 
and a soul, * He parted them one from another by the Passion. * For His soul 
hath descended into Hades, * which He despoiled, while the holy body of the 
Redeemer of our souls ** knew not corruption in the tomb. 
Verse: For He established the universe * which shall not be shaken. 
O Christ, in psalms and hymns we glorify Thy Resurrection from the dead. * 
For through it Thou hast freed us from the tyranny of Hades, ** and as God 
Thou hast granted us life eternal, ** and Thy great mercy. 
Verse: Holiness becometh Thy house, O Lord, * unto length of days. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thou, O Master of all things, * art the incomprehensible Creator of heaven 
and earth, * by suffering the Cross Thou hast become for me the source of 
immortality. * Submitting to burial and arising in glory, * Thou hast raised Adam 
with Thyself by Thine all-powerful hand. * Glory to Thine arising on the third 
day, * through which Thou hast granted us eternal life and the forgiveness of sins, 
** as Thou alone art lovingly compassionate. 
 Glory from the Menaion, if appointed, otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * 
Mother of God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-
immaculate one, * granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting 
now our supplications, ** pray thou that we all be saved. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, Full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, ** 
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Note: If it is a regular Sunday Vigil, we chant “O Theotokos and Virgin ...,” 
(Thrice). If it is one of the 12 great feasts, we chant the Troparion of the feast 
(Thrice). If it is a Sunday coinciding with some other feast, we chant “O 
Theotokos and Virgin ...,” (Twice), and the Troparion of the Feast (Once). 
And the Dismissal. 
If a Vigil is not served, we chant (Once): 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
From on high didst Thou descend, O compassionate One; * to burial of three 
days hast Thou submitted * that Thou mightest free us from our passions. ** O 
our Life and Resurrection, O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Resurrection Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the Resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth 
Thy love for mankind, O merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the 
Theotokos who bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT MATINS 
At “God is The Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
From on high didst Thou descend, O compassionate One; * to burial of three 
days hast Thou submitted * that Thou mightest free us from our passions. ** O 
our Life and Resurrection, O Lord, glory be to Thee. (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion from the Menaion, otherwise Glory ..., Both now ..., The 
Theotokion, in Tone VIII, (or in the Tone of that from the Menaion): 
O good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having endured 
crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the Resurrection: * 
disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own hand. * Show forth 
Thy love for mankind, O merciful One; * Accept the supplications of the 
Theotokos who bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing people, O our Savior! 
 After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma II), The Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VIII: 
Thou the Life of all, * didst rise from the dead, * and an angel of light cried 
out to the women saying: * “Cease your tears. Bring the good tidings unto the 
apostles.” * Cry aloud in hymns that Christ the Lord hath arisen ** who as God 
was well-pleased to save mankind. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted on high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
When Thou wast indeed risen from the tomb * Thou didst command the holy 
women to announce the Resurrection to the apostles, * as it is written; * and 
Peter, having arrived quickly, * stood by the grave and seeing the light in the tomb 
was affrightened. * observing the grave clothes lying therein, * without the divine 
body, * and believing he cried aloud: * “Glory be to Thee O Christ God our 
Savior, * Who hast saved us all, ** for Thou art the effulgence of the Father.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Let us hymn the heavenly gate and ark, * the all-holy mountain, the cloud of 
light, the heavenly ladder, * the spiritual paradise, the redemption of Eve, * the 
great treasure of the world; * because salvation for the world and forgiveness of 
ancient offences were wrought in her. * Therefore we cry unto her: * Intercede 
with thine own Son and God to grant forgiveness offences ** to those who 
devoutly worship thy most holy Offspring. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma III), The Sessional Hymns of the 
Resurrection, in Tone VIII: 
Mortals sealed Thy tomb, O Savior * and an angel rolled away the stone from 
the door, * and the women saw that Thou hadst arisen from the dead, * and 
announced the good tidings to Thy disciples in Zion: * “The Life of all hath risen 
and the bonds of death are loosed. ** O Lord, glory be to Thee.” 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
The women having brought sweet-smelling burial spices * heard an angel’s 
voice coming from the tomb: * “Cease thy tears, and bring joy instead of sorrow.” 
* Wherefore cry ye aloud in hymns that Christ the Lord is risen, ** who as God 
was well-pleased to save the race of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
In Thee, O Full of grace, * doth all creation rejoice, * the ranks of angels and 
the race of mankind; * O all-hallowed temple and spiritual paradise, * boast of 
Virgins. * For from thee God became incarnate * and He who is our God before 
the ages became a child. * He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it wider 
than the heavens. * In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; ** glory be 
to thee. 
If a POLYELEOS is appointed, we chant: (Select verses): 
Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.  
Verse: Blessed is the Lord out of Zion, who dwelleth in Jerusalem. Alleluia, 
alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy 
endureth forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the God of heaven; for His mercy endureth 
forever. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
(On the Sunday of the Prodigal Son, Meat-Fare, and Cheese-Fare Sundays, 
after the Polyeleos we chant Psalm 136: “By the rivers of Babylon ...,”) 
Then, the Megalynarion of the feast is chanted, if there is one, with the 
selected psalm verse. However, if it is a Sunday, in general parish practice the 
Megalynarion is chanted only once, without the psalm verse, unless it is a Great 
feast of the Lord, or the Theotokos. 
The Resurrectional Verses (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
The assembly of angels was amazed, * beholding Thee numbered among the 
dead; * yet, O Savior, * destroying the stronghold of death, * and with Thyself 
raising up Adam, ** Thou hast freed all from Hades. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of pity, * O ye women disciples? * Thus said 
the radiant angel within the tomb * addressing the myrrh-bearing women; * 
behold the tomb and understand, ** for the Savior hath arisen from the tomb. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
Very early * the myrrh-bearing women hastened * unto Thy tomb, lamenting, 
* but the angel stood before them and said: * the time for lamentation is passed, 
weep not, ** but tell the apostles of the Resurrection. 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes. 
The myrrh-bearing women, * with myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Savior, 
bewailing, * but the angel addressed them, saying: * Why number ye the living 
among the dead, * for as God ** He is risen from the tomb. 
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. 
Let us worship the Father, * and His Son, and the Holy Spirit, * the Holy 
Trinity, * one in essence, * crying with the seraphim: ** Holy, Holy, Holy art 
Thou, O Lord. 
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages, amen. 
In bringing forth the Giver of life, * thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O 
Virgin, * and hast brought joy to Eve * instead of sorrow; * and those fallen from 
life * have thereunto been restored, ** by Him Who of thee was incarnate, God 
and man. 
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to Thee, O God. (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany and: 
The Sessional Hymn: 
The myrrh-bearing women standing at the tomb of the Giver of life * seeking 
the immortal Master among the dead; * and having received the glad tidings of joy 
from the angel * announced unto the apostles that Christ the Lord is risen, ** 
granting the world great mercy. 
The Songs of Ascent: 1st Antiphon: 
From my youth the enemy doth tempt me, * enflaming me with the desire for 
pleasures; ** but placing my trust in Thee O Lord, I put him to flight. 
Let those that hate Zion, * become like grass before it is tilled; ** for Christ 
severeth their necks with the sharp blade of torments. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit all things have life; * Light from Light, eminent God: ** we 
hymn Him together with the Father and the Word. 
2nd Antiphon: 
Let my humble heart be sheltered by the fear of Thee; * lest it fall away from 
Thee by being conceited, ** O exceedingly compassionate One. 
He who hath his hope in the Lord * will not be afraid when the Lord judgeth 
all things ** with fire and torment. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Everyone inspired by the Holy Spirit seeth and foretelleth all, * working the 
greatest wonders, * singing of one God in three Hypostases; * for though the 
Divinity radiates with triune light, ** it ruleth as One. 
3rd Antiphon: 
I have cried unto Thee, O Lord, hearken unto me, * bend Thine ear to my 
supplications when I cry unto Thee, ** and do thou cleanse me before taking me 
from this life. 
Each and every one who returneth to mother earth * will depart to receive 
torments or rewards ** in reward for their life’s actions. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Contemplation of God by the Holy Spirit * is of a thrice-holy Unity; * for the 
Father is beginningless, * from Whom the Son was begotten before time, * and 
the Spirit equal in essence and majesty, ** doth blaze forth equally from the 
Father. 
4th Antiphon: 
Behold, what is so good, what is so pleasant * as to see brothers dwelling 
together? * For by this the Lord hath promised eternal life. 
The One who adorneth the lilies of the field * doth command us to be 
unconcerned ** over temporal things. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
By the Holy Spirit, * by one single cause all things gain the reward of peace; * 
for He is God perfectly consubstantial ** with both the Father and the Son. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: The Lord shall be King unto eternity; * thy 
God, O Zion, unto generation and generation. 
Verse: Praise the Lord, O my soul. I will praise the Lord in my life. 
Let every breath ...,  
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. Then: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ, * let us worship the holy Lord 
Jesus, * the only sinless One. * We venerate Thy Cross, O Christ, * and Thy holy 
Resurrection we hymn and glorify. * For Thou art our God, * and we know none 
other beside Thee; * we call upon Thy name. * O come, all ye faithful, * let us 
worship Christ’s holy Resurrection, * for, behold, through the Cross joy hath 
come to all the world. * Ever blessing the Lord, * we hymn His Resurrection; * 
for, having endured crucifixion, ** He hath destroyed death by death. 
Psalm 50, Then: 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the apostles * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * O merciful One, ** blot out the 
multitude of our transgressions. 
Have mercy on me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy; * and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassions, * blot out my transgressions. 
Jesus having risen from the grave, * as He foretold, * hath given us life eternal, 
** and great mercy. 
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” Then the Canons: 
Resurrection Canon Tone VIII. 
ODE I 
Irmos: The wonderworking staff of Moses, * striking and dividing the sea 
in the figure of a cross, * once drowned pharaoh the pursuing charioteer, * 
while it saved the fleeing people of Israel * as they fled on foot, * chanting a 
hymn unto God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
How can we not but marvel at Christ’s all-powerful divinity? To the faithful it 
poureth forth dispassion from his Passion, while from His holy side, it sheddeth 
forth a fount of incorruption, and from His tomb, eternal life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
How glorious the angel doth now appear to the women, wearing the luminous 
attributes of natural immaterial purity; for by his countenance he revealeth the 
radiance of the Resurrection as he crieth aloud, “The Lord hath been raised!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Theotokion: Glorious things have been spoken of thee in generation after 
generation, O Virgin Theotokos, who, while remaining pure, didst contain within 
thy womb God the Word. Wherefore, after God, we all honor thee as our 
protection. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The gates of the Hades of suffering have been destroyed, and its gatekeepers 
tremble in fear upon seeing in the lowest depths the One who on high supra-
naturally surpasseth the nature of all things. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The ranks of angels stood amazed when they saw mankind’s fallen nature, 
which had been held fast in the lowest depths, now seated upon the throne of the 
Father. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Mother without bridegroom, the ranks of angels and of mortal 
mankind sing thy praise without ceasing, for thou didst carry their Creator as an 
infant in thine arms. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Immaculate Mother of God, who hast given birth beyond nature to the 
incarnate and eternal Word, we sing thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Virgin hath given birth unto Thee, O Christ, the cluster of grapes from 
whence drippeth the life-bearing sweetness of the world’s salvation. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The race of Adam, having now been raised to blessedness beyond all telling, 
doth fittingly glorify thee, O Theotokos. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE III  
Irmos: O Christ fortify me on the rock of Thy commandments, * Thou who 
in the beginning didst establish the heavens with understanding * and 
didst establish the earth upon the waters, * for there is none holy save 
Thee, O only Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
The salvific Passion of Thy flesh, O Christ, hath justified Adam, who had been 
condemned by the taste of sin; for Thou, who alone art without sin, hast revealed 
that Thou didst remain uncondemned by the trial of death. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Jesus my God, Thou hast made the light of the Resurrection to shine forth 
upon those that sit in the darkness and shadow of death, and by Thy divinity 
Thou hast bound the strong one and scattered his spoils. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be higher than the cherubim and 
seraphim, O Theotokos, for thou alone hast received within thy womb, O 
undefiled one, God who is uncircumscribable; and so with hymns we believers 
ever call thee blessed. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
When of old I disobeyed Thy commandments, O Lord Who hath fashioned 
me, Thou didst reckon me a stranger; however having refashioned me and taught 
me obedience, Thou hast reconciled me to Thyself through the Crucifixion. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having made thine abode within a Virgin, Thou O Lord, didst 
appear in the flesh to mankind, as befitted Thee to be seen. And Thou didst reveal 
her to be truly the Mother of God and the succor of believers, O only Lover of 
mankind. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Grant help unto me by thine intercessions, O all-pure one, by warding off the 
assaults of dreaded dangers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
When thou, O Theotokos, didst give birth to the Prince of life on behalf of all 
the world, Thou didst become the restoration of our foremother Eve. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
By thy power grant me life, O all-pure one, who hath truly given birth to God 
in the flesh, the Hypostatic power of the Father. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 

--- PAGE 14 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, art my strength and Thou art my power, * Thou art 
my God and Thou art my joy, * Thou Who, while never leaving the bosom 
of Thy Father, * hast visited our poverty. * Therefore with the prophet 
Habbakuk I cry unto Thee, * “Glory to Thy power, O Lover of mankind!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
While I was hostile towards Thee, Thou didst love me exceedingly, for by a 
wondrous self-emptying, Thou didst descend to earth, O compassionate Savior, 
not spurning the indignity of the coarseness of my state, yet remaining in the 
height of Thine ineffable glory, whereby Thou hast glorified me who had hitherto 
existed in dishonor. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Who now doth not stand in awe, O Master, upon seeing death destroyed 
through Thy suffering, corruption taking flight through Thy Cross, and Hades 
emptied of its wealth through Thy death? These actions result from Thy lofty 
power, O Thou Crucified Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou art the boast of the faithful, O Mother unwedded, thou art 
the protection, thou art the refuge of Christians, their wall and safe harbor; for 
thou dost bring their supplications before thy Son, O all-immaculate one, and 
savest from dangers those who with faith and love acknowledge thee to be the 
pure Theotokos. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The lawless and disobedient children nailed Thee to the Cross, O Lover of 
mankind, but in Thy compassion Thou hast, through it, saved those who glorify 
Thy sufferings. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
By arising from the grave, Thou hast raised with Thee all the dead in Hades, 
and in Thy loving compassion Thou hast enlightened those who glorify Thy 
Resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Immaculate Mary, implore God whom thou didst bare to grant 
thy supplicants forgiveness of their offences. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Theotokos, thou art the un-ploughed land that brought forth the ear of 
corn which granteth life unto the world, do thou save those who sing thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
All we who have been enlightened know thee, O all-pure one, to be the 
Mother of God, for thou, O ever-virgin, didst bear the Sun of righteousness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Grant us the pardon of our offences, as thou alone art without sin, and grant 
peace unto thy world, O God, by the supplications of her who hath given birth to 
Thee. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Light never-waning, * why hast Thou turned Thy face from me * 
and why hath the alien darkness surrounded me, * wretched though I be? * 
But do Thou guide my steps I implore Thee * and turn me back towards 
the light of Thy commandments. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
O Savior, Thou didst endure being wrapped in a cloak as Thou wast mocked 
before Thy Passion, thus covering the unsightly nakedness of the first-formed 
Adam, and being nailed to the Cross naked, Thou didst strip from Thyself, O 
Christ, the tunic of death. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Rising out of the dust of death, O Christ, Thou hast refashioned my fallen 
nature and rendered it incorrupt, revealing it as once again a princely image, 
radiating with the light of incorruption. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having obtained a mother’s freedom of speech before thy Son, 
O all-pure one, we beseech thee to neglect not thy maternal care for us, for thee 
alone do we Christians present to the Master as a compassionate means of 
atonement. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Guide us and grant us peace by the power of Thy Cross, O Christ, for by it we 
fall down before Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
O our God, guide the lives of us who sing the praises of Thine arising, and 
grant us peace, O only Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Mary, most pure and revered, who knew not wedlock, implore 
thy Son and our God to send down upon us the faithful, His great mercy. 
Another, of the Theotokos. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Calm the stormy tempest of my passions, O thou who hast given birth to 
God, my guide and my Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The ranks of angels and the companies of mortals worship thine Offspring, O 
Immaculate Theotokos. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Mary Theotokos thou who without bridegroom hast brought to naught the 
expectations of our enemies, bring joy to those who hymn thy praises. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead 
me up from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I 
cried, * and Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Through a tree the author of evil hath mightily overthrown me, but raised 
upon a Cross, O Christ, Thou didst more mightily cast him down, confounding 
him, whilst raising me the one who had fallen. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
When Thou didst shine forth from the grave, then didst Thou take pity on 
Zion, and in Thy compassion didst renew it by Thy divine Blood, and now O 
Christ, Thou dost reign over it as King forever. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: May we be delivered from grievous faults by thine intercessions, 
O pure Birthgiver of God, and may we receive the divine radiance of the Son of 
God, who ineffably became incarnate from thee. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou didst stretch forth Thy hands upon the Cross, thus healing the hand of 
Adam the first-formed, which he so greedily stretched forth in Eden, and instead 
of the bitter tree, O Christ, Thou didst taste gall, and as All-powerful, Thou dost 
save those who glorify Thy sufferings. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The Redeemer tasted of the ancient sentence of death that He might abolish 
the palace of corruption, and when He had visited those in Hades, He saved, as 
one all-powerful, those who hymn the praises of His Resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Cease not to intercede for us, O Most holy Virgin Theotokos, 
support of the faithful, for by our trust in thee we are made strong, therefore with 
love we glorify thee and Him who from thee ineffably assumed flesh. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Theotokos, we the faithful proclaim thee to be the temple and ark, the 
living Bridal Chamber of God, and the gate of heaven. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Mary, bride of God, thine Offspring, Who hath become the destroyer of 
wooden idols, is worshipped together with the Father and the Spirit. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The Word of God revealed thee to mortal mankind to be a heavenly ladder, 
for through thee He descended to us. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
Having risen from the tomb, Thou didst raise the dead and resurrect Adam, * 
Eve now danceth with joy at Thy Resurrection. * And all the ends of the earth 
keep festival at Thine arising from the dead, ** O greatly merciful One. 
Ikos: When Thou didst plunder the dominions of Hades and raise the dead, O 
longsuffering One, Thou didst meet the women bearing myrrh, bringing them joy 
instead of sorrow; and to Thine apostles Thou hast revealed the symbols of Thy 
victory, O my Savior and giver of life, Thou hast enlightened creation, O Lover of 
mankind. Therefore the world rejoiceth at Thine arising from the dead, O greatly 
merciful One. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: Once in Babylon the fire stood in awe * of God's 
condescension; * for which sake the youths in the furnace, * dancing 
with joyous steps as in a meadow, chanted: * O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou!  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Thy glorious self-emptying, constituting the divine wealth of Thy poverty, O 
Christ, amazed the angels when they saw Thee nailed to the Cross, saving those 
who with faith cry aloud; “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Upon Thy divine descent the regions beneath the earth were filled with light, 
and the darkness which previously pursued those therein, was driven out. 
Therefore the prisoners from every age arose, crying aloud; “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Trinitarian: Speaking of God with Orthodox belief, we proclaim Thee O Lord 
of all, to be Father of the one only-begotten Son, and we know only one right 
Spirit Who proceedeth from Thee, consubstantial and co-eternal. 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the inhabited world, O God, as 
the prophet said, for lifted up upon the Tree, Thou hast called back all those who 
cry out to Thee with faith; “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou!” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Rising from the tomb as from sleep, O compassionate Lord, Thou hast raised 
the world with Thee, while creation, through the apostles’ preaching of Thine 
arising, hath been persuaded to cry to Thee; “Blessed art Thou O God of our 
fathers!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Equal in action, and equal in power and co-eternal with His 
Begetter, the Word is fashioned in the womb of the Virgin by the good pleasure 
of the Father through the activity of the Spirit; “Blessed art Thou O God of our 
fathers!” 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
For our salvation Thou didst appear incarnate from a virginal womb, and 
knowing Thy Mother to be the one who gave birth to God, we cry with 
thanksgiving; “Blessed art Thou O God of our fathers!” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
O Virgin, thou art the most blessed rod from Jesse’s root, blossoming with a 
salvific fruit for those who with faith cry to thy Son; “Blessed art Thou O God of 
our fathers!” 
 Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Hypostatic Wisdom of the Most High, through the Theotokos fill with 
wisdom and divine power all those who sing to Thee in faith; “Blessed art Thou 
O God of our fathers!” 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with heat 
fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived that they 
had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the Creator and 
Redeemer; * “Ye children bless, ye priests praise, * ye people, supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages”. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
In a manner befitting God, the supreme divine power of Jesus’ divinity hath 
shone forth in our nature: for having tasted of death in the flesh upon the Cross 
for the sake of all, He hath abolished the strength of Hades. Without ceasing; Ye 
children bless, ye priests praise, ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
The crucified One hath arisen, the boastful One hath fallen, the fallen and 
crushed have been set upright, corruption hath been banished and incorruption 
hath blossomed forth; for mortality hath been swallowed up by life; Ye children 
bless, ye priests praise, ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Trinitarian: The Godhead of triune Light, the single radiance shining forth 
from one three-Hypostatic nature, the Begetter without beginning, the Word of 
the Father, one with Him in Nature and Kingship, and the consubstantial Spirit; 
Ye children bless, ye priests praise, ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all 
ages.” 
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Unto the Lord Who, stripped naked, hath stretched out His hands upon the 
Tree for me, unto Him who doth call me and warm me with his noble nakedness, 
do all ye works of the Lord bless, and supremely exalt throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
The Lord Who hath raised me the fallen one, out of the lowest pits of Hades, 
and honored me with the high-throned glory of His Begetter, do all ye works of 
the Lord, bless, and supremely exalt throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou didst appear as a daughter of fallen Adam, but also as the 
Mother of the God who hath renewed my nature. Therefore all we His works sing 
His praises as Lord and supremely exalt throughout the ages. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Do thou quench the seductive and fiery darts of those who are our enemies, 
that we may hymn thee, O pure maiden, throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
In a manner surpassing nature, O Virgin, thou hast given birth to God the 
Word, the Creator and Savior; therefore we hymn thee throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
The unapproachable Light, Who made His abode within thee, O Virgin, hath 
shown thee to be a radiant golden lamp throughout the ages. 
After the Troparia from the Menaion for ODE VIII, we chant: 
Verse: We praise, we bless, we worship the Lord, praising and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
And then the appointed Katavasia: 
After which we chant the Hymn of the Most Holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
Note: on great feasts special Megalynarion are chanted in place of the Magnificat: 
Verse: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath rejoiced in 
God my Savior. 
And after each Verse:  
Refrain: More honorable than the cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the seraphim; * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; * for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: For the mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is His 
name; * and His mercy is on them that fear Him * unto generation and 
generation.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath showed strength with His arm, * and He hath scattered the 
proud in the imagination of their heart.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath put down the mighty from their seat, * and exalted them of 
low degree; * He hath filled the hungry with good things, * and the rich He 
hath sent empty away.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
Verse: He hath holpen His servant Israel * in remembrance of His mercy, * 
as He spake to our fathers, * to Abraham and his seed forever.  
Refrain: More honorable … 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Heaven was stricken with awe, * and the ends of the earth were 
filled with amazement, * for God hath appeared in the flesh, * and thy 
womb was rendered more spacious than the heavens. * Wherefore, the 
ranks of men and of angels * magnify thee as the Theotokos.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
Begotten simply in Thy divine nature which is without beginning, Thou didst 
become compound in nature by assuming flesh, giving it essence in Thyself, O 
Word of God, and enduring the Passion as a man, Thou didst remain beyond 
suffering as God, wherefore we magnify Thee in two natures inseparable and 
uncommingled. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy holy Resurrection O Lord. 
In accordance with Thy divine nature, O Most High, Thou didst address God 
as Thy Father when Thou didst descend to Thy servants and become man; and 
having risen from the dead Thou didst make Him who is by nature God and 
Master, Father by grace, of those born of earth, wherefore we magnify Thee 
together with Him. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: When thou didst give birth in the body in a manner surpassing 
nature to the good Word, Who came forth from the Father’s own essence before 
all ages, as He alone is Good, thou O Virgin was revealed as the Mother of God. 
Him we now comprehend to be beyond the nature of flesh, even though He is 
clothed in a natural body. 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Another, of the Cross and Resurrection: 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
We know that Thou art the Son of God by nature, conceived in the womb of 
the Theotokos, and that Thou didst become man for our sake, and, as we behold 
Thee hanging upon the Cross, we understand that Thou didst suffer in Thy 
human nature, yet as God Thou didst remain untouched by suffering. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross and Resurrection O Lord. 
Murky darkness hath been abolished, for from Hades Christ, the Sun of 
righteousness, hath dawned enlightening all the ends of the earth, radiant with the 
rays of his divinity, man from heaven, God on earth, whom we magnify in two 
natures.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Bend Thy bow, prosper and reign, O Son of the Theotokos, 
subdue the people of Ishmael who war against us, and grant unto all Orthodox 
Christians the Cross as an invincible weapon, and trophy of peace. 
Another, of the Theotokos: 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
We are filled with joy and gladness at the thought of thee, overflowing with 
healing for those who approach thee and devoutly proclaim thee to be the Mother 
of God. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
With psalms we sing thy praises, O thou who art Full of grace, and never 
silent, we ceaselessly offer thee our praises; for thou art a fount of rejoicing for all. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Fair is thy Fruit, O Theotokos, for those who partake of it, it is incorruption, 
and for those who magnify thee with faith, it is life. 
The Troparia from the Menaion, then the appointed Katavasia. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...,”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion (Svetilen). 
Note: The Exapostilarion is taken from the prescribed Eothinon according to 
the Resurrection Gospel, however, If the Menaion service is ‘feasted’ the 
Exapostilarion, with the appointed Theotokion, are taken from the Menaion. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
On the Praises: “Let every breath ...,” 8 Stichera of the Resurrection, however, 
if the service from the Menaion is ‘feasted’ sing the first 4 Stichera from the 
Resurrection, and the last 4 from the Menaion, with the appointed verses. 
Resurrection Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: To do among them the judgment that is written, * This glory shall 
be to all His saints. 
O Lord, though Thou didst stand before the judgment seat * being judged by 
Pilate, * yet Thou wast seated with the Father * and was not absent from Thy 
throne. * And risen from the dead Thou hast freed the world from slavery to the 
stranger, ** as Thou art full of compassionate pity and love for mankind. 
Verse: Praise ye God in His saints, * praise Him in the firmament of His 
power.  
O Lord, the Jews laid Thee as a corpse in a grave, * and soldiers guarded Thee 
as a sleeping king * sealing Thee with a seal as if a treasury of life; * but Thou 
didst arise ** and grant incorruption to our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
O Lord, Thou hast given us Thy Cross as a weapon against the devil; * for he 
doth quake and tremble, unable to contemplate Thy power; * for Thou didst raise 
the dead and abolish death: ** Wherefore we worship Thy burial and Thy rising. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Thine angel, O Lord, having proclaimed Thy Resurrection, * filled the guards 
with fear, * but he cried unto the women saying: “Why seek ye the living among 
the dead? * Being God He is risen ** granting life to the whole world.” 
Other Stichera by Anatolius: 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute. 
Thou didst endure the Cross, * O Thou who art impassible in Thy divinity, * 
to free us from slavery to the enemy * and Thou didst accept burial for three days, 
* making us immortal, * and granting life unto us through Thy Resurrection, ** O 
Christ God, Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
O Christ, I worship, I glorify, and I praise Thy Resurrection from the tomb, * 
through which Thou hast delivered us from the unbreakable bonds of Hades ** 
and as God hast granted the world eternal life and great mercy. 
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
The lawless men, watching over Thy grave * which had received Life, sealed it; 
* but Thou, as the immortal and all-powerful God, ** arose on the third day. 
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders. 
When Thou didst enter the gates of Hades, O Lord, * and didst shatter them, 
the prisoners therein cried aloud: * “Who is this?, for He hath not been 
condemned to the lowest parts of the earth, * but hath torn down the prisons of 
death as if a tent, * we received Him as One mortal, and we tremble before Him 
as God.” ** O all-powerful Savior have mercy on us. 
Glory ..., The Eothinon of the Resurrection Gospel  
Note: If the service from the Menaion is “feasted” the Eothinon is taken from 
the Menaion, and the Eothinon of the Gospel is read at the end of Matins. 
Both now ..., Theotokion. In Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve 
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise 
we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, 
glory be to Thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Having risen from the tomb, and having burst the bonds of Hades, * Thou 
hast destroyed the sentence of death, O Lord, * delivering all from the snares of 
the enemy. * Manifesting Thyself to Thine apostles, Thou didst send them forth 
to preach; * and through them hast granted Thy peace to the world, ** O Thou 
Who alone art greatly merciful. 
 
 

--- PAGE 25 ---
SUNDAY MORNING: TONE VIII 
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes.  
Remember us, O Christ, Thou Savior of the world, as Thou didst remember 
the thief upon the Cross; and deem us all worthy of Thy heavenly kingdom, O 
Thou Who alone art compassionate. 
Hearken, O Adam, and rejoice with Eve; for He who of old stripped you both 
naked, and by deception hath taken all of us captive, hath been set at naught by 
the Cross of Christ. 
Nailed of Thine own will to the Tree, O our Savior, Thou didst deliver Adam 
from the curse which came through the tree, and hast rewarded that which is in 
Thine image with a dwelling in paradise, in that Thou art compassionate. 
Today is Christ risen from the tomb, granting incorruption unto all the 
faithful; renewing the joy of the myrrh-bearing women after His suffering and 
Resurrection. 
Girded with power Thou didst ascend the Cross and wrestle with the tyrant, 
and as God didst hurl him from on high; but Adam hast Thou raised up with 
Thine invincible hand.  
Rejoice, O wise myrrh-bearing women, who were first to behold the 
resurrection of Christ, and who proclaimed to the apostles the glad tidings of the 
restoration of the whole world! 
O ye apostles, who are manifestly the friends of Christ and are to be 
enthroned with Him in glory: entreat Him with boldness, that He intercede for us, 
for ye are His disciples. 
Theotokion: Thy pure womb, O Theotokos, hath been declared the dwelling-
place of the unapproachable Godhead; upon which without fear the hosts of 
heaven dare not gaze, wherefore we cry unto thee; Rejoice thou who barest Him 
who gives life unto all. 
Resurrection Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
From on high didst Thou descend, O compassionate One; * to burial of three 
days hast Thou submitted * that Thou mightest free us from our passions. ** O 
our Life and Resurrection, O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Resurrection Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
Having risen from the tomb, Thou didst raise the dead and resurrect Adam, * 
Eve now danceth with joy at Thy Resurrection. * And all the ends of the earth 
keep festival at Thine arising from the dead, ** O greatly merciful One. 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
The Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Make your vows * and pay them to the 
Lord our God. 
Verse: In Judea is God known; His name is great in Israel.  
 
Alleluia, in Tone VIII: Come, let us rejoice in the Lord; let us shout with 
jubilation unto God our Savior. 
Verse: Let us come before His countenance with thanksgiving, and with 
psalms let us shout in jubilation unto Him. 
 
  
