--- PAGE 1 ---
SUNDAY OF THE PUBLICAN AND THE PHARISEE  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera. 
Then 3 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone I  
Brethren, let us not pray like the Pharisee: * for he who exalts himself shall 
be humbled. * Let us humble ourselves before God, * and with fasting cry aloud 
as did the Publican: * O God be merciful to us sinners. (Twice) 
The Pharisee, overcome with vainglory, * and the Publican, bowed down in 
repentance, * approached Thee the only Master. * The one boasted and was 
deprived of blessings, * while the other kept silent and was found worthy of gifts. 
* Confirm me, O Christ God, * in these his cries of sorrow, * for Thou lovest 
mankind.  
 Glory ..., in Tone VIII:  
Almighty Lord, I know how great is the power of tears. * For they led 
Hezekiah from the gates of death; * they delivered the sinful woman from the 
transgressions of many years; * they justified the Publican more than the 
Pharisee. ** And with all these I also pray: “Have mercy on me.”  
Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
After the entrance, “O Joyous Light ...”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
The Resurrection Aposticha from the Tone of the week, then: 
Glory from the Triodion ..., in Tone V:  
Mine eyes are weighed down by my transgressions, * and I cannot raise 
them on high, and see the height of heaven. * But receive me O Savior, for like 
the Publican I repent, ** and have mercy on me.  
Both now ..., in Tone V:  
Thou art the temple and portal, * the palace and throne of the King, * O 
most honored Virgin, * through whom Christ the Lord, my Redeemer, * Who is 
the Sun of righteousness, * hath revealed Himself unto those who sleep in 
darkness, * deigning to enlighten those * whom He hath fashioned in His image 
by His own hand. * Wherefore, O all-hymned one, * as thou hast acquired a 
mother’s boldness before Him, ** entreat Him without ceasing, that our souls be 
saved. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Then, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, 
** for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
 Blessed be the Name of the Lord and the rest.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the usual Troparia, in the Tone of the week: 
After the 1st and 2nd readings from the Psalter, The Sessional Hymns of 
the Resurrection, in the Tone of the week: Then the Resurrectional 
Verses: 
(THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes; and the rest. 
Then the small Litany and the Sessional Hymn, in the Tone of the week. 
The Hymns of Ascent, and Prokeimenon, in the Tone of the week: Let 
every breath ..., The Sunday Resurrection Gospel.  
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ etc. 
Psalm 50. Then the following Hymns of compunction, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., The gates of repentance, do Thou open unto me, O Giver of Life, 
* for early in the morning my spirit seeketh Thy holy temple, * bearing the 
temple of my body all defiled. * But as One who art compassionate ** cleanse it 
by Thy loving-kindness and mercy.  
 Both now ..., Guide me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos: * for I 
have polluted my soul with shameful deeds * and wasted all my life in 
slothfulness. ** but by thine intercessions * do thou deliver me from all impurity.  
In Tone VI: 
Have mercy upon me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy: * and 
according to the multitude of Thy compassion * blot out my transgressions.  
In Tone VIII As I the wretched one ponder the multitude of evil deeds I 
have done, * I tremble for fear of the dread day of judgment. * But trusting in 
Thy compassionate mercy, * like David do I cry unto Thee: ** “Have mercy 
upon me, O God, according to Thy great mercy.”  
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” and the canons: 
ODE I 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: When Israel walked on foot in the sea as on dry land, * on seeing 
their pursuer Pharaoh drowned, * they cried: * Let us sing to God * a song 
of victory. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
By parables Christ hath led all mankind to a life of amendment: Raising up 
the Publican from humbleness, he showed the Pharisee who exalted himself to 
be humbled. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
From humility cometh an exalted honor, but from pride we see a grievous 
fall; let us, then, strive to emulate the good actions of the Publican, and hate the 
evil ones of the Pharisee.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Every good deed is rendered useless through pride, while every evil is 
cleansed by humility. Wherefore, let us in faith embrace humility, and utterly 
abhor the ways of vainglory.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The King of all, wishing His own disciples to be humble-minded, taught 
them to emulate the sighing of the Publican and his humility.  
Glory ..., I groan as did the Publican, and with never-silent lamentations O 
Lord I now draw near to Thy loving compassion, do Thou be merciful to me 
who doth now pass through life in humility.  
Both now ..., O lady, I dedicate to thee my understanding and my counsel, 
my expectation, my body, soul and spirit. From grievous adversaries and 
temptations, and from every threat to come, do thou deliver and save me.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and 
utter discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders.  
ODE III 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: There is none as holy as Thou, * O Lord my God, * who hast 
exalted the horn of Thy faithful O good One, * and strengthened us upon 
the rock * of Thy confession. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
From the dung-hill of the passions the humble are lifted up on high, while 
from the height of the virtues the high-minded suffer a grievous fall: let us flee 
such an image of wickedness.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Vainglory doth nullify the riches of righteousness, whereas humility 
scattereth a multitude of passions; bestowing this upon us, show us to be like the 
Publican O Savior.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Like the Publican let us also beat our breasts and cry out in compunction, 
“O God cleanse us sinners,” that like him we may receive forgiveness.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Zealously, O ye faithful, let us increase in meekness, and with humility let us 
live out the days of our lives in suffering of the heart, weeping and prayer, that 
we may receive forgiveness from God.  
Glory ..., Let us cast away, ye faithful, the high-minded boasting and hurtful 
pride of the Pharisee, and his most wicked, repugnant to God, malice.  
Both now ..., In thee, my only refuge, have I set my trust: let me not fall 
away from my good hope, but grant me thy protection, O pure One, and deliver 
me from every evil snare of my wicked enemies.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Sessional Hymns from the Triodion, in Tone IV:  
Humility exalted the Publican who was overcome with shame at his evil 
deeds, * when he cried to the Creator, “Be merciful:” * but exaltation brought 
down from righteousness the wretched Pharisee who spoke boastfully. * 
Therefore let us earnestly desire that which is good ** and avoid that which is 
evil.  
Glory ..., Of old humility exalted the Publican * who cried aloud with tears, 
* “Be merciful,” and he was justified. * Let us all follow his example, * for we 
have fallen into the depths of evil. * Let us cry to the Savior from the depths of 
our hearts: ** We have sinned, be merciful, O Thou Who alone lovest mankind.  
Both now ..., Be swift to receive our prayers, O Lady, * and bring them to 
thy Son and God, all-immaculate Sovereign Lady. * Deliver from tribulations 
those who flee to thee. * Destroy the wiles and subdue the arrogance ** of those 
who godlessly war against thy servants, O most pure One. 
ODE IV 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the Lord. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Word, set an example showing that the path to exaltation is humility, 
having humbled Himself even unto taking the form of a servant, thereby 
instructing all, that he who humbleth himself shall be exalted on high.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The righteous Pharisee exalted himself and fell, wickedly rejecting humility, 
but through humility the Publican was exalted and justified. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
He who was without need of virtue was deprived of them, and shown to be 
foolish. Yet the riches of humility justified him who was in most need of them, 
whose humility let us emulate.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Lord, Thou didst forewarn all that Thou dost resist the high-minded, but 
grantest Thy grace to the humble. O savior send down now Thy grace upon us, 
for we have humbled ourselves.  
Glory ..., The Savior and Master, ever leading us to blessed exaltation, hath 
shown us that it is humility that raises one on high, for with His own hands He 
didst wash the feet of the disciples.  
Both now ..., O Virgin, who hast given birth to the unapproachable Light, 
by thy light-giving effulgence disperse the darkness of my soul, and taking me by 
the hand, guide my life into the path of salvation.  
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * 
Jesus the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands 
he hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Illumine with Thy divine light, I pray, O Good One, * the souls of 
those who with love rise early to pray to Thee, * that they may know Thee, 
O Word of God, * as the true God, * Who recalleth us from the darkness of 
sin. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Let us make haste to follow the Pharisee in his virtues and to emulate the 
Publican in his humility, and let us hate what is wrong in each of them: foolish 
opinion and the fall into self-destruction.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
 The righteousness of the Pharisee proved to be vain and was condemned, 
for it was yoked to prideful opinion; However the Publican became a co-
companion of humility, the virtue which exalts one on high.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Pharisee thought to drive swiftly in the chariot of the virtues; but the 
Publican outran him on foot, for he had yoked humility to compassion.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Pondering with our minds the parable of the Publican, let us all emulate him 
with tears, offering to God a contrite spirit, seeking the remission of our sins.  
Glory ..., Let us cast far away the wicked haughtiness and boasting of the 
Pharisee, that we may not be stripped of divine grace.  
Both now ..., A staff of strength grant unto all, O good one, who flee unto 
thee, grant them victory in the midst of all enemies and deliver them from every 
evil circumstance.  
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the 
God of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon 
all who hymn thee. 
ODE VI 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, * 
I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly Merciful One. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Publican along with the Pharisee ran the race of life, but the one was 
overcome by high-mindedness and shipwrecked, while the other was saved by 
humility.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Changing to a humble course of life, let us emulate the fervent wisdom of 
the Publican and flee the deadening conceit of the Pharisee; and we shall live.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Let us fervently follow the ways of Jesus the Savior and His humility, if we 
desire to reach the tabernacle of everlasting joy and to dwell in the land of the 
living.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Master, Thou hast shown to Thy disciples the humility that raiseth men 
on high, for girding Thy loins with a towel, and washing their feet Thou didst 
prepare them to follow Thine example.  
Glory ..., The Pharisee passed his life in virtue and the Publican in sin; but 
the former was brought low by his pride, while the latter was raised on high by 
his humble-mindedness.  
Both now ..., I was formed naked in innocence and simplicity; but the 
enemy hath clothed me in the raiment of transgressions and the grossness of the 
flesh. But by thine intercessions, O Maiden, I have been saved.  
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God 
* O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone IV  
Let us flee from the proud-speaking of the Pharisee * and learn from the 
Publican the loftiness of words of humility, * and with penitential lamentation let 
us cry aloud: “O Savior of the world ** be merciful to us, and cleanse us Thy 
servants’.  
Ikos : Let us all humble ourselves, brethren; sighing and lamenting, beating 
our conscience, that at the eternal judgment we may be numbered with the 
faithful and the righteous, and receive forgiveness. Let us pray that we behold the 
place truly peaceful, where there is neither pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing from the 
soul, in the wondrous Eden fashioned by Christ, for He is God coeternal with 
the Father.  
SYNAXARION READING: 
With God, on this present day we begin the Triodion, the hymns of which 
were composed by many of our holy and God-bearing Fathers, inspired by the 
Holy Spirit according to their worthiness. The first of all was the great author 
Cosmas of Maiuma, who composed the three odes (symbolic of the Holy and 
Life-Creating Trinity) for the Great and Holy Week of the Passion of our Lord 
and God and Savior Jesus Christ. After him others of the Fathers, including 
Theodore and Joseph of the Studite Monastery, following his zealous example, 
arranged the services of the other weeks of the Holy and Great Forty-day Fast, 

--- PAGE 9 ---
reserving them at first for the use of the Studite Monastery. Furthermore they 
composed and arranged hymns, seeking them and collecting them from other 
books of the Fathers. Since, according to the Triodion, Sunday, the celebration 
of the Resurrection, is the first day of the week as well as the last or eighth day, 
they prescribed the first ODE of the canon to be sung on the second day of the 
week, i.e. Monday. The second ODE was prescribed for Tuesday, the third day 
of the week, the third ODE for Wednesday, the fourth ODE for Thursday, the 
fifth ODE for Friday, and the sixth and seventh ODES for Saturday. The rest, 
the eighth and ninth ODES, are prescribed for every day. It must be known, 
however, that although it is called the Triodion, it does have services with other 
than three-ODE canons. It is so named because the majority of the services have 
three ODE canons, especially during Holy Week. For it was our Holy Fathers’ 
idea that through the entire Triodion would be commemorated in a concise form 
all God’s benefits to us from the beginning, using it as a reminder for all of us 
that we were created by Him, and were exiled from Paradise through the tasting 
of the fruit, rejecting the commandment that was given to us for our knowledge, 
and we were cast out through the envy of the arch villain serpent and enemy, 
who was made to crawl for his arrogance. That we remained cut off from the 
benefits of Paradise and were led by the devil. That the Son and Word of God, 
having suffered in His mercy, bowing the heavens, descended and made His 
abode in the Virgin and became man for our sake, showing us through His life 
the ascent into the heavens, through humility first of all then fasting and the 
rejection of evil and through His other deeds. That He suffered and rose from 
the dead and ascended once more into heaven, and He sent down the Holy Spirit 
upon His holy disciples and Apostles, who all proclaimed Him to be the Son of 
God and the most perfect God. And that once more the divine Apostles acted 
through the grace of the most Holy Spirit and gathered all the saints from the 
ends of the earth through their preaching, filling the world on high, which was 
the intention of the Creator from the beginning. Now the purpose of the 
Triodion intended by the Holy Fathers on these three present feasts of the 
Publican and the Pharisee, the Prodigal Son, and the Second Coming is a kind of 
preparatory lesson and stimulation to prepare ourselves for the spiritual labors of 
the Fast, having put aside our usual corrupt habits. First of all they present to us 
the parable of the Publican and the Pharisee, and they call the week following 
precursory. For those who desire to go off to do military battle, first ascertain the 
time of the battle from the leaders, so that having cleaned and polished their 
weapons, and preparing well all their other matters, and having removed all 
obstacles from their path, they earnestly go forth to their labors, taking the 

--- PAGE 10 ---
necessary supplies. Often before battle they tell anecdotes and tales and parables 
to incite their hearts to zeal, driving off idleness, fear, despair and other 
inadequate feelings. So the divine Fathers herald the coming fast against the 
armies of demons as a passion which holds fast our souls to cleanse ourselves of 
the poison accumulated over a long period of time. Not yet possessing those 
benefits, let us strive to obtain them, and arming ourselves properly, so let us set 
off to the labors of the Fast. Now the first weapon among the virtues is 
repentance and humility. And the temptation to attain the greatest humility is 
pride and arrogance. So they place before us first of all this present trustworthy 
parable from the Divine Gospel. It encourages us to shun the desire for the pride 
and arrogance of the Pharisee, and to cultivate the opposite desire of the 
Publican for humility and repentance. For the greatest and most grievous passion 
is pride and arrogance, since this is how the Devil fell from the heavens before 
the morning star and was cast into darkness. Because of this Adam, the father of 
our race, was driven from Paradise through partaking of the fruit. Through this 
example the Holy Fathers encourage all not to be proud of their successes, but 
always to be humble. For the Lord sets Himself against the proud, but He gives 
grace to the humble. Better a man who has sinned, if he knows that he has 
sinned and repents, than a man who has not sinned and thinks of himself as 
righteous. For Christ said, “I say to you that the Publican went down to his 
house justified rather than the Pharisee.” This parable reveals that no one should 
exalt himself, even though he has done good deeds, but rather should always be 
humble and pray from his heart to God, for even if he should fall into the most 
serious sin, salvation is not far off 
Through the prayers of all Thy holy Hymnographers,  
O Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the 
tyrant to cry: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Exalted by the works of self-justification, the Pharisee was grievously snared 
in the nets of vainglory, boasting madly; but the Publican was lifted on high on 
the light wings of humility, and drew near to God.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Using humility as a ladder, the Publican was raised on high to the heights of 
heaven; but by the putrid foolishness of pride the wretched Pharisee fell into the 
abyss of Hades.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The enemy doth catch the righteous and despoil them through vainglory, 
blinding sinners in the nets of despair. But let us emulate the Publican and hasten 
to escape from both these evils.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
 In our prayer before God, let us fall down with tears and fervent sighs, 
emulating the Publican in his lofty humility; and singing in faith: “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Glory ..., Thou hast forewarned Thy disciples, O Master, teaching them not 
to be lofty of wisdom, but to be numbered with those who are humble-minded. 
Therefore, O Savior, in faith we cry aloud to Thee: O God of our fathers, 
blessed art Thou.  
Both now ..., O thou beauty of Jacob, divine Ladder which of old he beheld 
stretching from earth to heaven, thou holy Virgin, who hath brought down from 
on high God made flesh, and doth bring mortal man up to heaven.  
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * 
the divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The humble-minded sighing of the Publican found the mercy of the Lord, 
and he was saved; but by the evil tongue of boasting, the Pharisee fell from 
righteousness.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O ye faithful, let us avoid the self-will of the Pharisee; who called himself 
pure, rather let us strive to emulate the Publican’s goodness, who gained 
forgiveness with humility.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O ye faithful, let us utter the words of the Publican in the holy temple, 
“God be merciful,” that with him we may obtain forgiveness, and be delivered 
from the vile boasting of the Pharisee.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Let us all emulate the sighing of the Publican and, speaking to God with 
warm tears, let us cry out: “O Lover of mankind, we have sinned, but in Thy 
merciful compassion, do Thou cleanse and save us.”  
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
God accepted the groaning of the Publican and having justified him, hath 
shown unto us all, that He is quickly turned to compassion by the sighings and 
tears of those who ask for the forgiveness of sins.  
Both now ..., I know of no other intercessor save thee, I offer thee, O pure 
and all-immaculate One, as my mediator before Him Whom thou didst bear. Do 
thou show me to be free from all that doth grieve me.  
Refrain: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, chanting and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)  
ODE IX 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders 
of Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the 
Word Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we 
magnify and thee we call blessed. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Christ hath set before us as a path to exaltation and an image of salvation, 
the humility of the Publican: which, let us strive after by rejecting disdainful pride 
and gaining God’s mercy through humble-mindedness.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Let us cast away pride and learn the righteousness of the humble-minded; 
let us not seek to justify ourselves, but rather let us abhor the delusion of 
vainglory, and with the Publican let us pray to God.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Let us offer the Creator entreaties for mercy, as did the Publican. Let us 
avoid the ungrateful prayers of the Pharisee and the boastful words with which 
he judged his neighbor, that we may gain God’s mercy and light.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Weighed down by a great multitude of sins, I have surpassed the Publican in 
an excess of evil, having embraced the self-adulating madness of the Pharisee, 
wherefore I am utterly devoid of all that is good: O Lord, spare me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Lord, grant blessedness to those who for Thy sake are poor in spirit, and 
who follow Thy teachings, bringing unto Thee a contrite heart. Receive and save 
them who worship Thee. 
Glory ..., May we never pray unto Thee as did the Pharisee, may we enter 
the Temple justified by sighing and tears, with a heart that is broken and 
humbled, laying aside the heavy yoke of sin and thus be cleansed. 
Both now ..., Grant us to hymn, glorify, and bless thee, to worthily honor 
thee, O most pure one; glorifying thy birth-giving, O only-blessed one, for thou 
art the praise of Orthodox Christians, and their divinely-acceptable intercessor 
before God 
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit 
leap for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor 
the holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion for the Resurrection Gospel of the week, then: 
Glory ..., from the Triodion, in Tone III: 
Let us flee from the wicked boasting of the Pharisee, * and learn the noble 
humility of the Publican, * that we may be exalted and cry aloud with him unto 

--- PAGE 14 ---
God: * Be merciful unto Thy servants, O Christ our Savior, * Who wast willingly 
born from a Virgin, * who hast endured the Cross and with Thyself raised up the 
world ** by Thy divine power.  
 
 Both now ..., Theotokion from the Triodion: 
The Maker of creation and the God of all, * took flesh from thine undefiled 
womb, O all-hymned Theotokos, * renewing the whole of my corrupted nature. 
* As thou wast before childbirth, * so wast thou left after childbirth. * Therefore 
we all praise thee with faith ** and we cry: Rejoice! Glory of the world.  
On the Aposticha, 4 Resurrection Stichera, in the Tone of the week: 
Then 4 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone VI: (Slavonic Typicon) 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
Brethren, let us not pray like the Pharisee: * for he who doth exalt himself 
shall be humbled. * Let us humble ourselves before God, * and with fasting cry 
aloud as did the Publican: * “God be merciful to us sinners.”  
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
The Pharisee, overcome with vainglory, * and the Publican, bowed down in 
repentance, * approached Thee the only Master. * The one boasted and was 
deprived of blessings, * while the other kept silent and was found worthy of gifts. 
* Confirm me, O Christ God, * in these his cries of sorrow, * for Thou lovest 
mankind.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end. 
In Tone III: Understand, O my soul, the difference between the Publican 
and the Pharisee, * hate the haughty words of the one, and eagerly imitate the 
contrite prayer of the other, crying aloud: ** “O God cleanse me a sinner and 
have mercy on me.”  
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of 
all Thy wonders. 
O ye faithful, let us hate the boastful words of the Pharisee * and emulate 
the contrite prayer of the Publican. * Let us not think proud thoughts, but 
humbling ourselves in contrition let us cry: ** God be merciful to our sins.  
Glory ..., From the Triodion, in Tone VIII: 

--- PAGE 15 ---
O Lord, Thou hast condemned the Pharisee * who justified himself by 
boasting of his works, * and Thou hast justified the Publican who humbled 
himself * and with cries of sorrow begged for mercy. * For Thou dost reject 
proud-minded thoughts, * but dost not despise a contrite heart. * Therefore 
humbled we fall down before Thee * who hast suffered for our sake: ** Grant us 
forgiveness and great mercy.  
 Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Most Blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him Who 
became incarnate of thee is Hades led captive, * Adam recalled, the curse 
annulled, Eve set free, death slain, * and we are given life. Wherefore, we cry 
aloud in praise: * Blessed art Thou, O Christ God, ** Who hast been thus well-
pleased, glory to Thee.  
Then the Great Doxology, and after it the appointed Resurrection Troparion: 
Before 1st Hour: Glory ..., Both now ..., Gospel Sticheron for the week. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes: 6 from the Tone of the week, 4 from ODE VI of the 
Triodion canon. 
The Publican along with the Pharisee ran the race of life, but the one was 
overcome by high-mindedness and shipwrecked, while the other was saved by 
humility.  
Changing to a humble course of life, let us emulate the fervent wisdom of 
the Publican and flee the deadening conceit of the Pharisee; and we shall live.  
Glory ..., The Pharisee passed his life in virtue and the Publican in sin; but 
the former was brought low by his pride, while the latter was raised on high by 
his humble-mindedness.  
Both now ..., I was formed naked in innocence and simplicity; but the 
enemy hath clothed me in the raiment of transgressions and the grossness of the 
flesh. But by thine intercessions, O Maiden, I have been saved.  
 
Order of Troparia & Kontakia as follows (for temple dedicated to a saint)  
Troparion of the Resurrection Tone: 
Troparion of the Temple : 
Glory ..., Kontakion of the Temple: 
Both now ..., Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone IV:  
Let us flee from the proud-speaking of the Pharisee * and learn from the 
Publican the loftiness of words of humility, * and with penitential lamentation let 
us cry aloud: “O Savior of the world ** be merciful to us, and cleanse us Thy 
servants’.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Prokeimenon, in the Tone of the week: 
 
2nd EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY: (3:10-15)  
My Child Timothy: Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, 
purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, Persecutions, afflictions, which 
came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: 
but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in 
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse 
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. But continue thou in the things which 
thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned 
them; And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able 
to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus 
Alleluia in the Tone of the week: 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE 18:10-14  
The Lord spake a parable saying: Two men went up into the temple to pray; 
the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus 
with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, 
unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes 
of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so 
much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be 
merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified 
rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he 
that humbleth himself shall be exalted. 
 Communion Verse: Praise Ye God in His Saints ...,  
