--- PAGE 1 ---
STICHERA AND SESSIONAL HYMNS 
SUNG ON FRIDAY EVENING AND SATURDAY 
MORNING IN THE EIGHT TONES FROM THE OKTOECHOS 
 
TONE THREE 
AT VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” after the Stichera of the day from the 
Triodion, we chant the following Stichera of the holy martyrs: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Great is the power of Thy Cross, О Lord! For it was planted in one place, 
yet worketh throughout the world; and it made apostles of fishermen and 
martyrs of the heathen, that they might pray on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Great is the power of Thy martyrs, O Christ! For though they lie in their 
tombs, they drive evil spirits away, and having struggled for piety with their 
faith in the Trinity, they have abolished the authority of the enemy. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
The prophets, the apostles of Christ and the martyrs enlightened and taught 
the erring nations to hymn the consubstantial Trinity, and made the children of 
mankind companions of the angels. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Made steadfast by faith, strengthened by hope, and spiritually united by the 
love of Thy Cross, О Lord, Thy martyrs put an end to the tyranny of the enemy 
and have received crowns; and with the incorporeal ones they pray on behalf of 
our souls. 
Then 4 Stichera from the Menaion (repeating the first) 
Glory ..., a composition of St. John the Damascene: 
For the reposed: All things human, which endure not after death, are vain. 
Our wealth will not remain, our glory will not go with us upon the way: for 
when death cometh, all these things will fade away. Wherefore let us cry out to 
Christ the immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who 
rejoice have their abode with Thee. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: How can we, O all-honored one, * not marvel at thine 
Offspring? * who is both God and man. * For without knowing a man, O all-
immaculate One, * without a father thou hast given birth to a Son in the flesh, * 
who without a mother was begotten from the Father before all ages, * yet in no 
way undergoing change, fusion or separation, * but preserving fully the 
characteristics of both natures. * Wherefore, O Sovereign Lady, and Virgin 
Mother, * beseech Him to save the souls of those ** who with Orthodox faith 
confess thee to be the true Theotokos.  
 
If the Liturgy of the Presanctified gifts is not served, the following is 
chanted at the Aposticha: 
AT FRIDAY VESPERS APOSTICHA  
To the Martyrs: Made steadfast by faith, strengthened by hope, and 
spiritually united by the love of Thy Cross, О Lord, Thy martyrs put an end to 
the tyranny of the enemy and have received crowns; and with the incorporeal 
ones they pray on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
For the reposed: All things human, which endure not after death, are vain. 
Our wealth will not remain, our glory will not go with us upon the way: for 
when death cometh, all these things will fade away. Wherefore let us cry out to 
Christ the immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who 
rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: O race of mankind, why are ye rebellious in vain? Short is 
the course on which we run. Life is but smoke, vapor, ashes and dust; No 
sooner doth it appear, than it quickly vanisheth. Wherefore let us cry unto 
Christ the immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who 
rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
 
O Theotokos - holy among women, * thou Mother unwedded: * entreat the 
King and God Whom thou didst bear, * that He save us, ** insofar as He is the 
Lover of mankind.  
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS ON SATURDAY MORNING 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Martyrs: 
Through your faith ye shine like most radiant beacons, O physicians of the 
infirm, and all-praised passion-bearers. Ye were undaunted by the torments of 
the torturers, and cast down the ungodliness of idolatry, having the true Cross 
as an invincible trophy. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Arraying yourselves in the full armor of Christ, and wielding the sword of 
faith, as martyrs ye hewed down hordes of the enemy; for, in hope of life, ye 
earnestly endured all the threats and wounds of the tyrants of old. Wherefore, 
ye have received crowns, О stouthearted martyrs of Christ. 
Verse: In the Saints that are in the earth * hath the Lord been wondrous. 
О holy passion-bearers, entreat the merciful God, that He grant unto our 
souls, the remission of sins. 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: When at Thy word we stand before Thine impartial 
tribunal, О Lord our Savior, put not to shame those who believe on Thee; for 
we have all sinned and fallen away from Thee. Wherefore, we beseech Thee: In 
the mansions of Thy righteous, grant rest to those whom Thou hast taken from 
among us, for Thou alone art sinless, О Christ. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: We hymn thee who hast mediated the salvation of our race, * 
O Virgin Theotokos; * for thy Son and our God, * accepting suffering on the 
Cross in the flesh * He had received of thee, * hath delivered us from 
corruption, ** in that He is the Lover of mankind.  
 
ON THE PRAISES 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the Martyrs: Come, all ye peoples, let us honor the memory of the holy 
passion-bearers. For, having become a spectacle to angels and to men, they 
have received crowns of victory from Christ God, and they ever intercede on 
behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
The warriors of Christ cast aside the fear of kings and tyrants; and with 
courage boldly confessed Him as the Lord and God of all, our God; and now 
they intercede on behalf of our souls.  
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
The hosts of the bodiless angels marveled at the sufferings of the martyrs; 
For though clad in mortal flesh, they paid no heed to their tortures, following 
the example of Christ the Savior's Passion; and they ever interceding on behalf 
of our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
For the reposed: O race of mankind, why are ye rebellious in vain? Short is 
the course on which we run. Life is but smoke, vapor, ashes and dust; No 
sooner doth it appear, than it quickly vanisheth. Wherefore let us cry unto 
Christ the immortal King: Grant rest to our departed brethren, where all who 
rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
 Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Without seed thou didst conceive by the Holy Spirit; we glorify 
thee and hymn thy praises: Rejoice, O most holy Virgin! 
 
AT SATURDAY MATINS APOSTICHA FOR THE REPOSED: 
A composition by Theophanes: 
Spec. Mel.: “Great is the power of Thy Cross, О Christ ...”: 
I glorify Thy precious Cross O Lord, whereby life and blessedness have 
been granted to those who with faith and love hymn Thy praises, O greatly 
merciful One. Wherefore we cry aloud unto Thee, O Christ God: Grant rest to 
our departed brethren, where all who rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
О Christ God Who alone art merciful and compassionate, Who hast an 
unapproachable abyss of goodness, Who knowest human nature, which Thou 
didst create, we beseech Thee: Unto those who have been taken from us grant 
rest where all who rejoice have their abode with Thee. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
When Thou didst rest in the tomb as a man, as God Thou didst raise up 
with invincible power, those who were sleeping in the graves, and who offer 
Thee unceasing hymnody. Wherefore, we beseech Thee, О Christ God: Unto 
those who have been taken from among us grant rest where all who rejoice 
have their abode with Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О Theotokos, all of us know thee to be the noetic lamp bearing the Light of 
the Godhead, Who had united Himself to the coarseness of human nature. 
Entreat thy Son and God, that unto those who have been taken from among us 
He grant rest where all who rejoice have jubilation. 
 
 
