--- PAGE 1 ---
STICHERA AND SESSIONAL HYMNS 
SUNG ON FRIDAY EVENING AND SATURDAY 
MORNING IN THE EIGHT TONES FROM THE 
OKTOECHOS 
 
TONE FOUR 
AT VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” after the Stichera of the day from the 
Triodion, we chant the following Stichera of the holy martyrs: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
O ye martyrs of the Lord, living sacrifices, noetic burnt-offerings, perfect 
offerings to God, lambs who knew God and are known by Him, whose fold no 
wolf can enter: Pray ye that with you we may also feed beside the waters of rest. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Precious is the death of Thy saints, O Lord. Slain by the sword, and by fire 
and freezing cold, they poured forth their blood, placing all their hope in Thee 
that from Thy hand they would receive the reward of their labors. They 
endured to the end and received from Thee O Savior, Thy great mercy. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
O saints, since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, unceasingly 
entreat Him for us sinners, asking that remission of sins, and great mercy, be 
granted to our souls. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Thou art glorified in the memorials of Thy saints, O Christ our God; by 
their intercessions send down upon us great mercy. 
Then four Stichera from the Menaion (repeating the first) 
Glory ..., a composition of St. John the Damascene: 
To the Martyrs: O Thou Who hast accepted the patient endurance of the 
holy martyrs; in Thy love for mankind do Thou accept our hymns of praise, and 
by their intercessions send down upon us great mercy. 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Prophet David, the ancestor of God, * spoke of thee in 
psalmody unto Him Who hath accomplished great things in thee. * For God 
was well pleased without father to become a man from thee, * the Queen who 
standeth at His right hand, * and He - the source of life - showed thee to be His 
mother, * that He might renew His own image, corrupted by the passions. * 
Having found the lost sheep wandering on the mountain * He hath laid it upon 
his shoulders, * that He may bring it to his Father; * and in accordance with His 
own will * unite it to the heavenly Powers * and thus, O Theotokos, save the 
world, ** Christ, Who is richly and abundantly merciful. 
 
 
If the Liturgy of the Presanctified gifts is not served, the following is 
chanted at the Aposticha: 
AT FRIDAY VESPERS APOSTICHA  
To the Martyrs: Thou art glorified in the memorials of Thy saints, O Christ 
our God; by their intercessions send down upon us great mercy. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
To the Martyrs: O Thou Who hast accepted the patient endurance of the 
holy martyrs: in Thy love for mankind do Thou accept our hymns of praise, and 
by their intercessions send down upon us great mercy. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: With the souls of the righteous who have reposed, O 
Savior, grant rest to the souls of Thy departed servants, preserving them in the 
life of blessedness which is in Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou inextinguishable lamp, * and throne of righteousness * most pure 
Sovereign Lady: ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
 
AT MATINS ON SATURDAY MORNING 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Martyrs: 
Armed with Thy Cross, O Christ our God, Thy passion-bearers defeated the 
machinations of the enemy, the author of all evil. They illumine mankind like 

--- PAGE 3 ---
radiant torches, guiding us, and granting healing to those who ask with faith. By 
their intercessions save Thou our souls. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
In their sufferings, O Lord, Thy martyrs received imperishable crowns from 
Thee our God. For possessed of Thy might they cast down the tyrants and 
crushed the feeble audacity of the demons. By their supplications save Thou our 
souls. 
Verse: In the Saints that are in the earth * hath the Lord been wondrous. 
Adorned with the blood of Thy martyrs throughout all the world, as with 
purple and fine linen, Thy Church crieth out to Thee through them, О Christ 
God: Send down Thy compassions upon Thy people, and grant peace to Thy 
commonwealth and great mercy to our souls! 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: In Thy loving compassion and almighty power, O Christ 
God, grant rest to the souls of those taken unto Thyself from this temporal life; 
Have mercy and forgive them all their transgressions; Have mercy, O merciful 
Lord on the work of Thy hands, by the prayers of the Theotokos, since Thou 
alone lovest mankind. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks 
of Angels, * hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * 
God incarnate in an uncomingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
 
ON THE PRAISES 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
Who is not filled with wonder, O holy martyrs, at beholding the good fight 
that ye have fought? For armed with the Cross and in the body confessing 
Christ, ye defeated the bodiless adversary; wherefore, as is meet, ye have been 
shown to be expellers of demons, and opponents of the barbarians, ever 
interceding that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
O holy martyrs, ye have become companions of the angels, bravely 
preaching Christ at the tribunal; for having forsaken all the beautiful things of 

--- PAGE 4 ---
this world, as though they did not exist, ye held fast to the faith as your 
steadfast hope. Wherefore, putting deception to flight, ye pour forth gifts of 
healing upon the faithful, ever interceding that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
How shall we not marvel at your struggles, O holy martyrs? For, clothed in 
mortal bodies, ye vanquished the incorporeal enemies; the threats of tyrants 
roused no fear in you; neither did the infliction of tortures, fill you with fear. 
Therefore, as is meet, ye have been truly glorified by Christ, ask ye great mercy 
for our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Precious is the death of Thy saints, O Lord. Slain by the sword, and by fire 
and freezing cold, they poured forth their blood, placing all their hope in Thee 
that from Thy hand they would receive the reward of their labors. They 
endured to the end and received from Thee O Savior, Thy great mercy. 
Glory ...,  
Where is the passionate attraction of the world? Where is the illusion of 
transitory things? Where is the gold and silver? Where are the multitude of 
servants and their clamor? All is dust, all is ashes, all is but a shadow. Come ye, 
and let us cry aloud to Christ Who is immortal: О Lord, grant Thine eternal 
good things unto those who have departed from us, granting them rest in Thy 
blessedness which waxeth not old. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Having thee O Theotokos as our hope and intercession, * we fear 
not the assaults of the adversary, ** for thou dost save our souls.  
 
AT SATURDAY MATINS APOSTICHA: 
A composition by Theophanes: 
Truly awesome is the mystery of death. How the soul is separated from the 
body, and this harmony and union is broken, and severed by the will of God. 
Wherefore we entreat Thee: In the dwellings of Thy righteous grant rest to 
those who have departed unto Thee, О Bestower of life, and Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
For those who believe in Thee, death is but a dream; for when Thou, the 
Master of all, wast laid in the tomb, Thou didst destroy the power of death, 

--- PAGE 5 ---
abolishing its ancient dominion. Wherefore we entreat Thee: Those who have 
departed unto Thee do Thou grant to dwell in the joy of Thy saints and the 
splendor of the just.. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Thou hast become our righteousness and sanctification, and the redemption 
of our souls. For Thou didst lead us justified and redeemed unto the Father, 
taking upon Thyself the punishment and debt due from us. And now we entreat 
Thee: Grant rest to the departed in the joy and radiance of Thy saints, O our 
Benefactor and Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Following, the words of the divinely eloquent prophets, O all-
immaculate One, we believe thee to be the Theotokos. For thou didst ineffably 
give birth to God in the flesh, Who hath delivered us from the bondage of sin. 
Ever beseech Him, that He illumine thy departed servants with the radiance of 
His Light. 
 
 
 
