--- PAGE 1 ---
STICHERA AND SESSIONAL HYMNS 
SUNG ON FRIDAY EVENING AND SATURDAY 
MORNING IN THE EIGHT TONES FROM THE 
OKTOECHOS 
 
TONE FIVE 
AT VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” after the Stichera of the day from the 
Triodion, we chant the following Stichera of the holy martyrs: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Girding themselves with the shield of faith, and arming themselves with the 
sign of the Cross, Thy saints O Lord, bravely gave themselves over to torments, 
casting down the pride and delusion of the devil. By their supplications, O God 
almighty, send down peace upon the world, and great mercy upon our souls. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Despising all things earthly, and bravely withstanding torture, ye were not 
deprived of your goodly hope, but became heirs of the Kingdom of heaven. O 
ye all-praised martyrs, since ye have boldness before God the Lover of 
mankind, ask that peace be granted to the world, and great mercy to our souls. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Intercede on our behalf, O holy martyrs, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities: for unto you hath been given the grace to pray for us.  
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
With your souls filled with insatiable love, O holy martyrs, ye did not deny 
Christ; and enduring divers wounds in sufferings, ye cast down the audacity of 
the tyrants, and keeping the faith unaltered and unharmed, ye were translated to 
the heavens. Wherefore, since ye have boldness before Him, ask that He grant 
us great mercy. 
Then four Stichera from the Menaion (repeating the first) 
Glory ..., a composition of St. John the Damascene: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
For the reposed: I called to mind the words of the Prophet, ‘I am but dust 
and ashes.’ I went also to the tombs, and beheld the bones laid bare, and I said: 
‘Which is the king or which the warrior, which the rich man or which the 
beggar, which the righteous or which the sinner?’ But grant rest with the 
righteous, O Lord, to Thy servants, as the Lover of mankind. 
Both now ..., 
Theotokion: In the Red Sea of old * an image of the Bride who knew not 
wedlock was depicted. * There Moses was the one who parted the sea, * here 
Gabriel is the minister of the miracle. * At that time Israel marched dry-shod 
through the deep, * now the Virgin doth seedlessly give birth to Christ. * The 
sea after Israel’s passage remained impassable; * the Immaculate one after 
bearing Emmanuel remained incorrupt. * O God, who doth exist and is pre-
eternal, * and hath appeared as man, ** have mercy upon us. 
 
If the Liturgy of the Presanctified gifts is not served, the following is 
chanted at the Aposticha: 
AT FRIDAY VESPERS APOSTICHA  
Intercede on our behalf, O holy martyrs, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities: for unto you hath been given the grace to pray for us.  
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
With your souls filled with insatiable love, O holy martyrs, ye did not deny 
Christ; and enduring divers wounds in sufferings, ye cast down the audacity of 
the tyrants, and keeping the faith unaltered and unharmed, ye were translated to 
the heavens. Wherefore, since ye have boldness before Him, ask that He grant 
us great mercy. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: I called to mind the words of the Prophet, ‘I am but dust 
and ashes.’ I went also to the tombs, and beheld the bones laid bare, and I said: 
‘Which is the king or which the warrior, which the rich man or which the 
beggar, which the righteous or which the sinner?’ But grant rest with the 
righteous, O Lord, to Thy servants, as the Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O thou who art full of joy, intercede by thy supplications, and beg that a 
multitude of compassions, and the cleansing of our many sins, be granted to 
our souls, we entreat thee.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS ON SATURDAY MORNING 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Martyrs: 
Through the miracles of Thy holy martyrs, O Christ God, Thou hast given 
us an indestructible rampart. By their supplications make steadfast Thy faithful 
peoples, in that Thou art good and the Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, longing to drink from the cup of Thy sufferings; 
forsook the beauties of life, and shared in the life of the angels. By their 
intercessions, O Christ, grant peace and great mercy to our souls. 
Verse: In the Saints that are in the earth * hath the Lord been wondrous. 
The hosts of heaven marveled exceedingly at the corrections of the holy 
martyrs; how, fighting the good fight in their mortal bodies, they invisibly 
vanquished the incorporeal foe by the power of the Cross; and they pray unto 
the Lord, that our souls find mercy. 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: With the righteous grant rest, O our Savior, unto Thy 
servants, and settle them in Thy courts, as it hath been written, overlooking, in 
that Thou art good, all their transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, 
committed either knowingly and unknowingly, O Lover of mankind. 
 Both now ..., 
O Christ God, Who hath shone forth upon the world from the Virgin and 
shown us forth as children of the light: have mercy upon us!  
 
ON THE PRAISES 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the Martyrs: Blessed is the army of the heavenly King: for though the 
passion-bearers were born of this earth, spurning the pangs of their bodies they 
hastened to attain to the dignity of the angels; and through their sufferings were 
deemed worthy of the honour of the incorporeal hosts. By their prayers, O 
Lord, send down upon us great mercy. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Thy passion-bearers, O Lord, emulating the life of the angelic ranks; 
endured tortures as though incorporeal, in oneness of mind possessing the hope 
of the blessings promised them. By their intercessions, O Christ God, grant 
peace to Thy world, and great mercy to our souls. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
The holy martyrs struggled here on earth, enduring cold and given over to 
fire and water. And as the waters received them, they cried aloud: “We went 
through fire and water, and Thou didst bring us out into refreshment!” By their 
prayers, О Christ God, have mercy upon us! 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Rejoicing in the midst of their torments, the saints cried aloud: “These 
things are goods with which we may trade with the Lord: for, instead of the 
wounds we bear on our bodies, radiant vesture shall blossom forth for us upon 
our resurrection; instead of dishonor, we shall receive crowns; instead of fetters 
in prison, we shall receive paradise; and instead of condemnation with 
malefactors, we shall have life with the angels!” By their supplications, О Lord, 
save Thou our souls! 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: Thou hast fashioned me, O Lord, and set Thine hand 
upon me; and Thou hast commanded me, saying; ‘To the earth shalt thou 
return once more.’ Guide me on Thy right path, forgive me my transgressions, 
and absolve and save me, I pray Thee, O Lover of mankind. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Alas, O wretched soul! What answer wilt thou have to give to 
the Judge at that hour when the thrones are set for judgment and the Judge 
descendeth from the heavens, with myriads of angels? When He is seated upon 
the judgment seat to try His unprofitable servants like me, what shalt thou bring 
forth then? Truly naught, having defiled thy mind and body, wherefore, fall 
down before the Virgin, and cry without ceasing, that she grant thee abundant 
forgiveness of sins!  
 
AT SATURDAY MATINS APOSTICHA: 
A composition by Theophanes: 
Spec. Mel.: “Rejoice ...”: 
With the light of Thy countenance, O Christ, enlighten those who have 
departed, as Thou art compassionate, and lead them to a place of verdure, 
beside the waters of Thy pure divine repose. In the longed for bosom of our 

--- PAGE 5 ---
forefather Abraham, where Thy light shineth in purity, and the springs of love 
ever pour forth, where the assemblies of all the righteous rejoice and exult in 
Thy goodness. Number Thy servants with them, and grant them great mercy. ‘ 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
О Compassionate One, be Thou well-pleased to grant those who have 
passed from transitory things unto Thee, the Master of all and our God, all-
harmonious voices to hymn and glorify Thy might; and grant that they may be 
enlightened by Thy beauty, and in a most pure manner partake of sweet and 
beauteous communion with Thee, where the angels rejoice around Thy throne 
and the choirs of the saints joyously stand round about. Grant rest with them 
and great mercy unto Thy servants. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Unto those who have fallen asleep in faith, grant rest with the choir of the 
prophets, with the ranks of the apostles and the martyrs, and with all those who 
from time immemorial, have been justified by Thy redeeming Passion and Thy 
Blood, by which Thou hast ransomed captive mankind. In Thy love forgive 
them all their offences, for Thou alone hast lived a sinless life upon the earth, 
Thou alone art holy, Thou alone art free among the dead. Therefore grant unto 
Thy servants rest and great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Having conceived Christ the King and Bestower of life, we 
who were enslaved by the law of sin, O Lady, have been set free, O only Virgin 
Mother. Through Him we are freely justified by grace. Entreat Him now to 
write into the book of life, the names of those who acknowledge thee to be the 
Birthgiver of God; that saved by Thy mediation, we may receive from Thy Son 
redemption, worshipping Him Who granteth the world great mercy. 
 
 
 
