--- PAGE 1 ---
STICHERA AND SESSIONAL HYMNS 
SUNG ON FRIDAY EVENING AND SATURDAY 
MORNING IN THE EIGHT TONES FROM THE 
OKTOECHOS 
 
TONE SIX 
AT VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” after the Stichera of the day from the 
Triodion, we chant the following Stichera of the holy martyrs: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, denied Thee not, nor did they forsake Thy 
commandments; by their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
О martyred passion-bearers, citizens of heaven, who suffered on the earth, 
ye endured many torments. By their prayers and intercessions, О Lord, preserve 
us all. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Those who suffered martyrdom for Thee, O Christ, endured a multitude of 
torments, and have received perfect crowns in the heavens, may they ever 
intercede on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Thy Cross O Lord, was the invincible weapon of the martyrs. They beheld 
impending death before them; but, foreseeing the life that is to come, they 
became strengthened with hope in Thee. By their intercessions have mercy on 
us. 
Then four Stichera from the Menaion (repeating the first) 
Glory ..., a composition of St. John the Damascene: 
For the reposed: Thy command was to me my beginning and foundation. 
For desiring to fashion me into a living creature from natures visible and 
invisible: Thou didst form my body from the earth, and given me a soul by Thy 
divine and quickening breath. Wherefore, O Christ, grant rest to Thy servants in 
the land of the living, in the habitations of the righteous. 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Who doth not call thee blessed, O most holy Virgin? * Who 
will not hymn thy most pure birthgiving? * For the only-begotten Son Who 
shone forth timelessly from the Father, * came forth, ineffably incarnate, from 
thee, the pure one; * and being God by nature, He becameth man for our sake, 
* not divided into two Hypostases, but known in two natures without 
commingling. ** Him do thou beseech, O pure and most blessed one, that our 
souls find mercy!  
 
If the Liturgy of the Presanctified gifts is not served, the following is 
chanted at the Aposticha: 
AT FRIDAY VESPERS APOSTICHA  
To the Martyrs: Those who suffered martyrdom for Thee, O Christ, 
endured a multitude of torments, and have received perfect crowns in the 
heavens, may they ever intercede on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
To the Martyrs: Thy Cross O Lord, was the invincible weapon of the 
martyrs. They beheld impending death before them; but, foreseeing the life that 
is to come, they became strengthened with hope in Thee. By their intercessions 
have mercy on us. 
Verse. Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: Thy command was to me my beginning and foundation. 
For desiring to fashion me into a living creature from natures visible and 
invisible: Thou didst form my body from the earth, and given me a soul by Thy 
divine and quickening breath. Wherefore, O Christ, grant rest to Thy servants in 
the land of the living, in the habitations of the righteous. 
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
Theotokion: By the prayers of her that gaveth birth to Thee O Christ,* and 
of Thy martyrs and apostles, * the prophets and holy hierarchs, * the venerable, 
the righteous and of all the saints, ** grant rest to Thy departed servants.  
 
AT MATINS ON SATURDAY MORNING 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Martyrs. 
Having patiently endured the struggle of martyrdom, the saints received 
from Thee the honors of victory; having set at naught the intentions of the 
iniquitous, they received crowns of incorruption. For their sake be Thou 
entreated, О God, and grant us great mercy. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
While the choirs of the incorporeal ones stood by, holding trophies of 
victory, and tyrants and kings were amazed, the most wise spiritual athletes 
showed forth a firm opposition amidst the wounds of torture, during their 
martyrdom at the tribunal, thereby casting down the apostate by their 
confession of Christ. О Lord Who strengthened them, glory be to Thee! 
Verse: In the Saints that are in the earth * hath the Lord been wondrous. 
The memorial of Thy saints, O Lord, hath appeared like the the garden of 
paradise in Eden, for therein all creation rejoiceth. By their prayers grant us 
peace and great mercy. 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: Truly all things are vanity; life is but a shadow and a dream: 
for in vain doth every mortal trouble himself, as the Scripture hath said, seeking 
to acquire the whole world, and then departing to the tomb, where kings and 
paupers are found together. Wherefore, O Christ God, grant rest to Thy 
departed servants in that Thou lovest mankind. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion О Thou Who called Thy Mother blessed, Thou didst willingly 
go to Thy suffering, and shine forth upon the Cross, desiring to seek out Adam, 
and saying to the angels: Rejoice with Me, for I have found the lost coin! О our 
God Who hast wisely ordered all things, glory be to Thee! 
 
ON THE PRAISES 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
To the Martyrs: At the commemoration of Thy saints, O Lord, all creation 
celebrateth; the heavens rejoice with the angels, and the earth with all mankind 
keepeth festival. By their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
O Lord, if we had not had Thy saints as intercessors, and Thy goodness 
being merciful to us, how should we have dared, O Savior, to hymn Thee, 
Whom angels do unceasingly glorify? O Thou that knowest the hearts of men, 
spare our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
The memorial of the martyrs is a joy to those who fear the Lord. For having 
suffered for Christ’s sake, they received from Him crowns of victory; and now 
they intercede with boldness on behalf of our souls. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Our God hath made wondrous His chosen saints. Rejoice and be glad, all ye 
His servants, for crowns and His kingdom have been prepared for you! We 
beseech you: Forget us not! 
Glory ...,  
 For the reposed: Of old, the eating of the tree in Eden sickened Adam 
when the serpent spewed forth its venom; for from this universal death hath 
arisen, devouring man. But the Master came, and cast down the serpent, 
granting us resurrection. Unto Him, therefore, let us now cry aloud: Have pity 
on those whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, О Savior, and, as Thou lovest 
mankind, grant them rest with the saints. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: We have come to know God Who was incarnate of thee, O 
Virgin Theotokos. Him do thou entreat that our souls be saved.  
 
AT SATURDAY MATINS APOSTICHA: 
A composition by Theophanes: 
Spec. Mel.: “Having set aside ...”: 
О greatly merciful Master, Who hast unapproachable loving-kindness for 
us and an inexhaustible well-spring of divine goodness. Grant rest in the land of 
the living to those who have departed unto Thee, that they forever abide in Thy 
dwelling-place, which they so longed for. For Thou, O Christ, hast shed Thy 
blood for all, and hast redeemed the world with Thy life. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
Thou didst willingly endure a life-creating death; pouring forth life upon 
the faithful, and granting them eternal joy. Do Thou establish in this joy those 
who have fallen asleep in the hope of the Resurrection, and in Thy mercy 
forgive them all their offences, for Thou alone art sinless, Thou alone art good 
and the Lover of mankind, that Thy Name, O Christ, may be hymned by all, 
and that we may glorify Thy salvific love for mankind. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Knowing Thee to be, in Thy divine power, the Lord of the living and Master 
of the dead, О Christ, we pray Thee: With Thy chosen ones, О Lover of 
mankind, grant rest unto Thy faithful servants who have departed unto Thee, 
our Benefactor, in a place of comfort, amid the splendors of the saints; for 
Thou art He Who willest mercy, and as God savest those whom Thou didst 
create according to Thine image, О only greatly Merciful One. 
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou wast shown to be a receptacle of divine majesty, О most pure one, for 
thou didst contain God and gave birth unto Christ in two natures but a single 
Hypostasis, О Mother who knewest not wedlock. О pure one, entreat thine 
only-begotten and firstborn Child, Who preserved thee an unblemished virgin 
even though thou hast given birth, that He grant rest amid light and incorrupt 
blessedness unto those who have fallen asleep in the Faith. 
 
 
