--- PAGE 1 ---
STICHERA AND SESSIONAL HYMNS 
SUNG ON FRIDAY EVENING AND SATURDAY 
MORNING IN THE EIGHT TONES FROM THE 
OKTOECHOS 
 
TONE SEVEN 
AT VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” after the Stichera of the day from the 
Triodion, we chant the following Stichera of the holy martyrs: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
О Savior, when Thou comest to judge the whole world put me not to 
shame, for I have committed shameful acts. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Glory be to Thee, O Christ God, Thou boast of the apostles, joy of the 
martyrs; whose preaching was of the consubstantial Trinity.  
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
O holy martyrs, ye who have fought the good fight and received your 
crowns, pray to the Lord, that our souls be saved. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Despising every earthly thing, O holy martyrs, and having bravely preached 
Christ at the tribunal, ye received your reward from Him for your torments. 
Since ye have boldness before God, we beseech you to pray to Him as one 
almighty, that He save the souls of us who flee unto you.  
Then 4 Stichera from the Menaion (repeating the first) 
Glory ..., a composition of St. John the Damascene: 
For the reposed: О our Savior, grant rest to our brethren whom Thou hast 
removed from transitory things, and who cry: Glory be to Thee, О Lord. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: Thou hast been known to have become a Mother * in a 
manner surpassing nature O Theotokos, * and hast remained a Virgin in a 
manner beyond recounting and understanding; * no tongue can expound the 

--- PAGE 2 ---
wonder of thy birthgiving. * For while thy conceiving O Pure one was all-
glorious, * the manner of thy birthgiving is beyond comprehension; * for where 
God so willeth, the order of nature is overthrown. * Wherefore, we all, knowing 
thee to be the Mother of God, * do earnestly entreat thee: ** Pray thou that our 
souls be saved! 
 
If the Liturgy of the Presanctified gifts is not served, the following is 
chanted at the Aposticha: 
AT FRIDAY VESPERS APOSTICHA  
Despising every earthly thing, O holy martyrs, and having bravely preached 
Christ at the tribunal, ye received your reward from Him for your torments. 
Since ye have boldness before God, we beseech you to pray to Him as one 
almighty, that He save the souls of us who flee unto you.  
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
O all-praised martyrs, spiritual lambs, reason endowed whole burnt offerings 
and sacrifices acceptable and well-pleasing to God. Ye were not hidden by the 
earth, but heaven hath received you; and Ye have become companions of the 
angels we entreat you to pray with them unto our God and Savior, that He 
grant peace to the world, and save our souls. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
For the departed О Thou Who in the beginning fashioned man in Thine 
image and in accordance with Thy likeness, in paradise Thou didst appoint him 
to rule over Thy creatures; but, led astray by the malice of the devil, he partook 
of the fruit, breaking Thy commandment. Wherefore, Thou didst condemn him 
to return to the earth from whence he had been taken, О Lord, and to beg for 
repose. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
О thou who alone didst receive the uncontainable Word of God, and hast 
given birth to Him incarnate: Pray that our souls be saved. 
 
AT MATINS ON SATURDAY MORNING 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Martyrs: 
Struggling on earth, Thy saints trampled the enemy underfoot and abolished 
the delusion of the idolatry, О Lord; wherefore, they have received crowns 
from Thee, the Master and Lover of mankind, the merciful God, Who granteth 
great mercy to the world. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
Rejoice, О ye righteous, and let the heavens be glad! For, struggling on the 
earth, the martyrs trampled the enemy underfoot and abolished the delusion of 
idolatry. Let the Church leap up, celebrating with hymns of victory to Christ 
God, the Judge of the contest, the one Granter of victory, Who giveth great 
mercy to the world. 
Verse: In the Saints that are in the earth * hath the Lord been wondrous. 
Having armed themselves with the power of Thy Cross, О Lord, Thy 
martyrs vanquished the enemy and put to shame the delusion of idolatry; 
wherefore, chanting with the angels they cry out a hymn of victory, glorifying 
Thee, О Christ. By their prayers grant cleansing and great mercy to our souls. 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: In the land of the living and the habitations of Thy 
righteous do Thou number the souls of those whose memory we keep, О Lover 
of mankind; and if any of them have sinned in this life, forgive them, granting 
great mercy to the world, in that Thou art the merciful God Who is speedily 
placated. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: As thou art the treasury of our resurrection, O all-hymned one, 
lead up from the pit and abyss of transgression those who place their trust in 
thee, for thou having given birth to our Salvation, thou hast saved those guilty 
of sin. Thou wast a Virgin before giving birth, a virgin during birth, and didst 
remain a Virgin after birthgiving.  
 
ON THE PRAISES 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
Celebrating the memorial of Thy passion-bearers, O Christ, we chant, crying 
aloud: ‘O Lord, glory be to Thee.’ 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
In the midst of the tribunal of the lawless, the passion-bearers cried aloud 
rejoicing: ‘O Lord, glory be to Thee.’ 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
O all-praised passion-bearers, enlightening the whole world with the 
radiance of your piety, ye cry aloud to Christ: ‘O Lord, glory be to Thee.’ 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Breathing with one purpose and looking upon a single hope, the passion-
bearing martyrs, having found the one path to life, which is death for Christ, 
urged one another on to death. О the wonder! For, snatching up the treasures 
of torment, they said one to another: “If we die not now, we shall die in any 
case; wherefore, let us do things worthy of life: let us do what needs be done 
with love of honor, that we may sell what we have and buy life with death!” 
Through their supplications, О God, have mercy on us. 
Glory ...,  
 For the reposed: О Merciful Lover of mankind, in the land of Thy 
righteous do Thou number those who in faith have passed over to thee from 
ages past. 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: With the apostles and martyrs pray thou, О Virgin, that those 
who have passed away may find great mercy at the judgment. 
 
AT SATURDAY MATINS APOSTICHA: 
A composition by Theophanes: 
Thou wast seen dead upon the Cross and wast laid in the tomb as one dead, 
О only Immortal One, delivering mortal mankind from mortality and 
corruption. As Thou art an inexhaustible Abyss of loving-kindness and a Source 
of goodness, grant rest to Thy servants who have departed from us. 
Verse: Blessed are those whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
О Good One, grant that those who have passed over unto Thee may be 
enlightened with Thine incorrupt beauty, and delight in Thy comeliness and the 
rays of Thy divine light, joining chorus amid the effulgence of heaven with the 
angels, surrounding Thee, the Master, King and Lord of glory. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
As God, the inexhaustible majesty of divine gifts, as the abundantly rich 
treasury of goodness, cause those who have passed over to Thee to dwell in the 
lands of Thine elect, in a place of rest, in the house of Thy glory, in the 
sustenance of paradise, in Thy virginal chamber, in that Thou art 
compassionate. 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
Thou hast given birth in the flesh to the Redeemer, the Fullness of the Law; 
for those who lived before His coming found no justification in the Law; but 
Christ, Who was crucified for our sake, hath thereby granted us justification. 
Wherefore, as thou hast a mother’s boldness, entreat thy compassionate Son, 
that He grant peace to the souls of those who have passed away from us in 
piety, О all-hymned one. 
 
 
