--- PAGE 1 ---
STICHERA AND SESSIONAL HYMNS 
SUNG ON FRIDAY EVENING AND SATURDAY 
MORNING IN THE EIGHT TONES FROM THE 
OKTOECHOS 
 
TONE EIGHT 
AT VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” after the Stichera of the day from the 
Triodion, we chant the following Stichera of the holy martyrs: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
O martyrs of the Lord, ye sanctify every place and heal every manner of 
infirmities: and now we entreat you to intercede on our behalf, that our souls 
may be delivered from the snares of the enemy. 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, no longer mindful of the temporal things of this life, 
despised not torture for the sake of the life to come, which they manifestly 
inherited, wherefore they rejoice with the angels. By their supplications grant 
great mercy to Thy people. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
What virtue, what praise, are due the saints? For they bowed their heads 
beneath the sword for the sake of Thee Who bowed down the heavens and 
descended to us; they shed their blood for Thee Who abased Thyself and 
assumed the form of a servant; they humbled themselves even unto death, 
imitating Thy poverty. By their intercessions, О God, have mercy on us, in the 
multitude of Thy compassions! 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
O ye martyrs of the Lord, we beseech you to intercede before our God: pray 
ye that abundant mercy be granted to our souls, and the cleansing of our many 
sins. 
Then four Stichera from the Menaion (repeating the first) 
Glory ..., a composition of St. John the Damascene: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
For the reposed: I weep and lament when I contemplate death and behold 
our beauty, which hath been created according to the image of God, lying in the 
grave, bereft of form, devoid of glory, unsightly. О the wonder! What is this 
mystery concerning us? How have we been given over to corruption? How have 
we been yoked together with death? Truly, as it is written, this is by the 
command of God, Who giveth rest unto the departed. 
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: In His love for mankind, the King of heaven appeared on 
earth * and dwelt among men; * for He Who received flesh from the pure 
Virgin * and cameth forth from her having received human nature, * is the only 
Son of God, * twofold in nature but not Hypostasis. * Therefore, proclaiming 
Him to be truly perfect God and perfect man, * we confess Christ our God. * 
Him do thou beseech, O unwedded Mother, ** that our souls find mercy!  
 
If the Liturgy of the Presanctified gifts is not served, the following is 
chanted at the Aposticha: 
AT FRIDAY VESPERS APOSTICHA  
O ye martyrs of the Lord, we beseech you to intercede before our God: pray 
ye that abundant mercy be granted to our souls, and the cleansing of our many 
sins. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
О Lord. 
I weep and lament when I contemplate death and behold our beauty, which 
hath been created according to the image of God, lying in the grave, bereft of 
form, devoid of glory, unsightly. О the wonder! What is this mystery concerning 
us? How have we been given over to corruption? How have we been yoked 
together with death? Truly, as it is written, this is by the command of God, 
Who giveth rest unto the departed. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Thy death, О Lord, won immortality for us; for if Thou hadst not been laid 
in the tomb, paradise would not have been opened. Wherefore, grant rest to the 
departed, in that Thou lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
O pure Virgin, portal of the Word, Mother of our God: pray thou that we be 
saved.  
AT MATINS ON SATURDAY MORNING 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Martyrs: 
O holy martyrs, ye were shown to be noetic beacons, for by faith ye have 
dispersed the gloom of deception, ignited the lamps of our souls, and entered 
with glory into the heavenly bridal chamber of the Bridegroom. * Wherefore we 
now entreat you, intercede that our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Verse: Wondrous is God in His saints, * the God of Israel. 
By their temperance, the martyrs of Christ mortified the fiery impulses of 
the passions, and received the grace of Christ, whereby they drive infirmities 
from the sick, and work miracles, in that they are alive, even after death. O what 
a truly all-glorious wonder it is, that their bare bones pour forth healings. Glory 
be to our one God. 
Verse: In the Saints that are in the earth * hath the Lord been wondrous. 
О prophets, martyrs of Christ, and holy hierarchs, who with the wisdom of 
piety lawfully finished the good race and received unfading wreaths from God, 
unceasingly ask His grace for us, that He grant us the forgiveness of our 
transgressions, in that He is a readily conciliatory God. 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: O Thou Who by the depth of Thy wisdom dost provide all 
things out of love for mankind, and grantest unto all that which is profitable, O 
only Creator: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy servants; for in Thee have 
they placed their hope, O Creator and Fashioner and God. 
 Both now ..., 
O Good One, Who for our sake wast born of the Virgin * and, having 
endured crucifixion, cast down death by death, * and as God revealed the 
resurrection: * disdain not that which Thou hast fashioned with Thine own 
hand. * Show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; * Accept the 
supplications of the Theotokos who bore Thee, ** and save Thy despairing 
people, O our Savior! 
ON THE PRAISES 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
O holy martyrs, ye were shown to be noetic beacons, for by faith ye have 
dispersed the gloom of deception, ignited the lamps of our souls, and entered 
with glory into the heavenly bridal chamber of the Bridegroom. * Wherefore we 
now entreat you, intercede that our souls be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Ye struggled greatly, О saints, valiantly enduring tortures at the hands of the 
iniquitous; and though ye have passed from this life, ye still work wonders in 
this world and heal those made sick by their passions. О holy ones, pray ye that 
our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
O invincible martyrs of Christ, having triumphed over delusion by the 
power of the Cross, and gained as your reward the grace of eternal life. Ye 
feared not the threats of tyrants, and suffering tortures ye rejoiced; and now 
your blood hath become for us the healing of our souls, pray ye that our souls 
be saved. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Having clothed yourselves with the breastplate of the Faith, and armed 
yourselves with the Cross as a sword, ye showed yourselves to be mighty 
warriors, bravely opposing the tyrants and casting down the delusion of the 
devil; and, victorious, ye were deemed worthy of crowns. Pray ye ever on our 
behalf, that our souls be saved. 
Glory ...,  
For the reposed: For those who have lived in fornication infinite is the 
torment, the gnashing of teeth, the inconsolable weeping, the fiery Gehenna, 
the outer darkness, the worm which sleepeth not, the ineffectual tears, and the 
implacable judgment; wherefore, before the end let us cry aloud, saying: О 
Master Christ, grant rest with the elect unto those whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself! 
 Both now ..., 
Theotokion: I flee to thy protection, О holy Virgin Theotokos, for I know 
that through thee I shall obtain salvation; for thou art able to help me, О pure 
one. 
 
AT SATURDAY MATINS APOSTICHA: 
A composition by Theophanes: 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
Dipping Thy fingers in Thy blood and staining them therewith as with red 
ink, Thou hast signed for us a royal reprieve, О Master; wherefore, we entreat 
Thee with faith: Among Thy firstborn number those who have departed unto 
Thee, the tenderly compassionate One, and grant that they may receive the joy 
of Thy righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen * and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Having fulfilled Thy priestly ministry as a man, and been sacrificed as a 
lamb, Thou didst redeem mankind from corruption, offering Thyself as an 
oblation to the Father. As Thou lovest mankind, do Thou enroll the departed in 
the land of the living, where torrents of delight pour forth, and well-springs of 
eternal life flow. 
Verse: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
O Thou Who, in the depths of Thine ineffable wisdom, dost set the bounds 
of life, and foresee things to come, cause the servants whom Thou hast taken to 
Thyself to dwell in the life to come. Settle them, by peaceful waters, in the 
splendor of the saints, О Lord, where the voice of joy and praise is heard. 
Verse: Their memorial * is from generation to generation. 
О Word Who art invisible, of the same nature and form as the Father and 
the Spirit, for my sake Thou didst appear as a man in the flesh. In that Thou art 
merciful and lovest mankind, with the beauties of Thy majesty and comeliness 
enlighten those who have passed from this life, О Author of life. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Theotokion: In that thou didst conceive the beginningless Word of God the 
Father, with thy maternal boldness earnestly entreat Him, О Theotokos, that 
He number thy servants where the jubilation of the righteous who rejoice and 
praise thee, is continuous, and where the radiance is eternal, and the voice of 
him who keepeth festival is sweet. 
 
 
