--- PAGE 1 ---
THE SATURDAY OF THE REPOSED 
(The Saturday before the Sunday of the Last Judgment)  
We celebrate the memorial of all Orthodox Christians who have fallen 
asleep from the beginning, our brethren in Christ. 
VESPERS ON FRIDAY EVENING  
The Psalm of Introduction (Psalm 103), the great Litany, and the appointed 
chanting of the Psalter (the Eighteenth Kathisma). 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera, 3 to the Martyrs in the Tone of the week, 
and these 3 for the reposed, in Tone VIII: 
Calling to remembrance by name today * all the dead from all the ages * 
who with faith have lived piously. * O ye faithful, let us sing praises to the 
Savior and Lord, * asking Him fervently to grant them a good defense * in the 
hour of judgment before our God, * who will judge all the earth. * May they 
receive a place at His right hand in joy; * may they dwell in glory with the 
righteous and the saints, ** and be deemed worthy of His heavenly Kingdom.  
By Thine own Blood, O Savior, * Thou hast ransomed mankind, * and by 
Thy death Thou hast delivered us from bitter death, * granting us life eternal by 
Thy Resurrection. * Grant rest then, O Lord, to all those who have fallen asleep 
in godliness, * whether in the wilderness or in the city, * on the sea or on land, * 
in every place, sovereigns, rulers and hierarchs, * priests, monastics and those 
married, of every age and every race, ** and deem them worthy of Thy heavenly 
Kingdom. 
By Thine arising from the dead, O Christ, * no longer doth death rule over 
those that have died in piety. * Wherefore we pray fervently: * Grant rest in Thy 
courts and in the bosom of Abraham * to Thy servants from Adam to this 
present day * who have worshiped Thee in purity, * our fathers and brethren, 
friends and kin, * all who in this life have offered faithful service to Thee, * and 
who have now departed to be with Thee, ** O God, and deem them worthy of 
Thy heavenly Kingdom. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
I lament, and weep when I see death * and look upon our beauty, formed 
according to God’s image, * lying in the grave disfigured, inglorious, and bereft 
of animate form. * O strange wonder! What mystery is this concerning us? * 
How have we been delivered unto corruption? * How have we been yoked to 
death? * All this, as is written, is by the command of God, ** who granteth rest 
unto the departed. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week from the 
Oktoechos. There is no Entrance with the censor, unless prescribed in the 
Menaion. After “O joyful Light ...,” Instead of the Prokeimenon of the day, we 
chant the following, in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their memorial is unto generation and generation. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their souls shall dwell among good things. (Alleluia x3) 
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”: Litany: Let us complete ..., 
On the Aposticha, we chant one Sticheron to the Martyrs and two for the 
reposed by St. john of Damascus, all in the Tone of the Week and between 
them we insert the same verses as at the Prokeimenon: Blessed are they ..., and: 
Their memorial ...,  
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
My beginning and foundation * was accomplished by Thy creative will, * for 
Thou didst will to fashion me * as a living creature from visible and invisible 
natures; * having brought forth my body from the earth, * and given me a soul 
by Thy divine and quickening breath. * Wherefore, O Savior, * grant rest unto 
Thy servants in the land of the living, ** in the tabernacles of the righteous. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
By the prayers of her that gaveth birth to Thee O Christ, * and of Thy 
martyrs and apostles, * the prophets and holy hierarchs, * the venerable, the 
righteous and of all the saints, ** grant rest to Thy departed servants.  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
The Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
O Thou Who by the depth of Thy wisdom * dost provide all things out of 
love for man, * and grantest unto all that which is profitable, O only Creator: * 
Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy servants; ** for in Thee have they 
placed their hope, O our Creator and Fashioner and God. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
In thee do we have a rampart and calm haven * and an intercessor 
acceptable to God, ** Whom thou didst bear, O Theotokos unwedded, thou 
salvation of the faithful. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
After the end of Vespers, If the Pastor so desireth, we celebrate in the 
narthex a Panachida service for the departed, at which we chant the 
canon for the reposed, in the Tone of the week. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
AT MATINS 
After the six Psalms and the great Litany;  
Alleluia in Tone VIII, (Thrice) with the verses: 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their memorial is unto generation and generation. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their souls shall dwell among good things. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Troparion of the day, in Tone VIII; 
O Thou Who by the depth of Thy wisdom * dost provide all things out of 
love for man, * and grantest unto all that which is profitable, O only Creator: * 
Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy servants; ** for in Thee have they 
placed their hope, O our Creator and Fashioner and God. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
In thee do we have a rampart and calm haven * and an intercessor 
acceptable to God, ** Whom thou didst bear, O Theotokos unwedded, thou 
salvation of the faithful. 
After the first chanting of the Psalter (the Sixteenth Kathisma) we chant the Sessional 
Hymns of the holy martyrs, in the Tone of the Week. Then the reader begins the 17th 
Kathisma (Psalm 118): 
Verse: Blessed are those that are blameless in the way, who walk in the law 
of the Lord. 
Verse: Blessed are they that search out His testimonies, and seek Him with 
their whole heart. 
And so the reader continues with the first half of the Kathisma down to verse 91; and as 
he reads the Choir chants softly without pause: 
Tone V: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; 
When the reader hath said verse 91, the Choir chants Thrice the two following verses: 
Verse: If Thy law had not been my meditation, then should I have perished 
in my humiliation.  
Verse: I will never forget Thy statutes, for in them Thou hast quickened me. 
Then the small Litany for the reposed:  
Priest/Deacon: Again and Again ..., 

--- PAGE 5 ---
After this the reader continues with the second half of the 17th Kathisma: I am Thine, 
save me..., while the Choir chants softly without pause:  
Tone V: Save me, O Savior. 
The reader continues to verse 174, and the Choir chants Thrice the II Concluding verses: 
Verse: My soul shall live, and shall praise Thee: and Thy judgments will help 
me. 
Verse: I have gone astray like a lost sheep: O seek Thy servant, for I have 
not forgotten Thy commandments. 
The choir then sings the Evlogitaria of the reposed, in Tone V: 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
The Choir of the Saints hath found the Fountain of Life * and the Door of 
Paradise. * May I also find the way through repentance. * I am the lost sheep, 
call me, O Savior, and save me. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Ye that have preached the Lamb of God, * and like lambs were slain, O holy 
ones, * translated unto life that ageth not and is everlasting, * fervently entreat 
Him, O ye martyrs, * to grant us forgiveness of our sins 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Ye that have trod the narrow way of sorrow; * all ye that in life have taken 
up the Cross as a yoke, * and have followed Me in faith, * come, enjoy the 
honors and heavenly crowns * which I have prepared for you. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
I am an image of Thine ineffable glory, * though I bear the wounds of sin; * 
take compassion on Thy creature, O Master, * and cleanse me by Thy loving-
kindness; * and grant me the longed-for fatherland, * making me again a citizen 
of paradise. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
O Thou Who of old didst fashion me out of nothing, * and didst honor me 
with Thine image divine, * but because of my transgression of Thy 
commandment * didst return me again unto the earth, from which I was taken: 
* Restore to me again Thy likeness, ** that I may be refashioned in that former 
beauty. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Grant rest, O God, to the souls of Thy servants, * and commit them to 
paradise, * where the choirs of the Saints O Lord, * and of the righteous shine 
as luminaries; * Grant rest, unto Thy departed servants, * overlooking all their 
transgressions. 
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
The triple radiance of the one Godhead * let us piously hymn, crying aloud: 
* Holy art Thou, O beginningless Father, * co-beginningless Son, and Divine 
Spirit; * Do Thou enlighten us Who with faith Worship Thee ** and snatch us 
from the eternal fire. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
 Rejoice, O thou pure one, Who hast given birth to God in the flesh * for 
the salvation of all, * and through Whom mankind hath found salvation; * 
through thee may We find paradise, ** O Theotokos, pure and blessed. 
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany for the reposed:  
Priest or Deacon: Again and Again ..., 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Grant rest, O our Savior, with the righteous * unto Thy servants, * and settle 
them in Thy courts, * as it is written, overlooking, as Thou art good, * their 
transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, * and all that they have committed 
either in knowledge or in ignorance, ** O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., O Christ God, Who didst shine forth unto the world 
* from the Virgin, * manifesting through her the sons of light, ** have mercy on 
us. 
Then Psalm 50. 
The Canons 
We chant the canon of the patron saint of the church or monastery With 
6 Troparia (including the Irmos), and the canon for the reposed from the 
Triodion, with 8 Troparia. 
ODE I, in Tone VIII: 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: Let us, O people, send up a melody . . . . 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
As we celebrate today the memory of the dead from the ages, let us all 
entreat Christ to deliver from the everlasting fire those who have fallen asleep in 
the faith, and in the hope of eternal life. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
In the depths of Thy judgments, O Christ, with fullness of wisdom Thou 
hast preordained the end of each man’s life, its appointed time and manner. 
Therefore, All-Merciful One, at the judgment save those in every land whom 
the grave hath hidden. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
It is Thee who hath limited the time of our life here; therefore, when we 
waken from the night of life, make us sons of the never-ending day: Orthodox 
priests and kings and all Thy faithful people. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those hidden by the waters, or fallen in battle, swallowed by earthquake, 
murdered by murderers, or consumed by fire, the faithful, and grant them, O 
merciful One, a place with the righteous. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Overlook all the transgressions of the flesh, O our Savior, in every age, by 
every nation of mankind, and grant that all who must give answer to Thee may 
stand before the judgment-seat of Thee the Creator, uncondemned. 
Glory ..., I sing the praises of Three self-dependent Hypostases in One 
Nature, the Father unbegotten, the Son begotten, and the Holy Spirit: 
sovereignty and power without beginning, a single Godhead. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Truly thou dost appear as heaven on earth, far 
greater than the highest heavens, O unwedded Virgin. For from thee hath 
shone forth upon the world the Sun and King of righteousness. 
Katavasia: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous 
God * Who hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory 
* and crying aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
ODE II 
(Note: The canon for the temple does not have an ODE II, therefore this 
Irmos is chanted in place of the Irmos of the canon of the temple.) 
Irmos: See now, see that I am your God, * begotten of the Father before 
all ages, * conceived without a man in these latter times from the Virgin, 
* abolishing the sin of the forefather Adam, * as the Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
See now, see that I am your God, who in righteous judgment hath fixed the 
bounds of life, bringing forth from corruption into incorruption all who have 
fallen asleep in the hope of the eternal resurrection. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
O Lord, Thou receivest from the four corners of the earth those who have 
died in faith, at sea and on the land, in rivers, springs, lakes or wells, devoured 
by wild beasts, birds or creeping things. Grant rest to them all. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
O Lord, all that is, is in the palm of Thy hand, Thou dost discern all things 
a-priori, before they dissolve into the four elements: in Thy coming do Thou 
restore and raise up all, forgiving them all their offences committed in 
knowledge or in ignorance. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
O Lord, how fearful shall be Thy second coming! For as lightning Thou 
shalt come on earth and raise up all Thy creatures to be judged. Grant to those 
who lived with faith in Thee, to meet Thee on that day and be counted worthy 
to dwell with Thee.  
Glory ..., A most perfect unity in Three Hypostasis, a supreme Godhead, O 
Father unbegotten, Son only-begotten, Spirit proceeding from the Father and 
made manifest through the Son: single in essence and in nature, One Lordship 
and One Kingdom, save us all. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The wonder of thy conceiving is beyond speech, 
O Mother and Virgin: for how didst thou give birth and yet remain undefiled? 
How dost thou bear a child, without knowing a man? This news is new and 
wonderful to me, how, surpassing nature, the Word of God was born of thee. 
Katavasia: See now, see that I am your God, * begotten of the Father 
before all ages, * conceived without a man in these latter times from the 
Virgin, * abolishing the sin of the forefather Adam, * as the Lover of 
mankind. 
ODE III 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: O Word of God who hast made firm. . .  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To those who have passed through the course of this life in the glory of 
piousness, do Thou O God, make worthy to be adorned with a crown of 
righteousness, and may they enjoy eternal blessings. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those who have been suddenly snatched away, burnt by lightning, frozen 
by cold, or struck down by any other calamity, grant rest, O God, when Thou 
shalt try all things by fire. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those who have sailed across the ever-troubled sea of this life, grant safe 
anchorage O Christ, in the harbor of immortal life with Thee, nurtured by an 
Orthodox life. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Those whom the creatures of the sea or the birds of the air have devoured, 
by Thy judgments O Christ God, raise up in glory on the Last Day. 
Glory ..., In my thoughts I distinguish Three Hypostases within the 
simplicity of the divine Oneness, without commingling their characteristics, for, 
like the swift flash of lightning, the Three-fold radiance is seen in a Unity. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Mind cannot fathom the wonder brought to pass 
in thee. For thou didst conceive without a man, O pure One, and hast given 
birth while keeping thy virginity. Wherefore the angelic hosts and the race of 
mankind sing thy praises throughout the ages. 
Katavasia: O Word of God who hast made firm the heavens * with Thine 
own hand, * through the enlightenment of Thy true knowledge * make 
firm our hearts, * for we have put our trust in Thee. 
The usual small Litany after the third Ode. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
O Savior, who for our sakes didst endure the Cross and death, * who didst 
put Hades to death and raised the dead, * grant rest, O Lover of mankind, * to 
those who have departed from us; * and at Thy dread and fearful Coming, O 
Giver of Life, * in the multitude of Thy mercies * deem them worthy of Thy 
Kingdom. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Show forth thy ready protection, help and mercy 
* upon thy servants, O pure one; * dampen the waves of vain thoughts, * and 
raise up my fallen soul, O Theotokos, * for I know, O Virgin, I know, ** that 
thou canst do whatsoever thou dost will.  
ODE IV 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain. . . . 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Fathers and forefathers, grandfathers and great-grandfathers, from the first 
times up to these last times, who have died in holiness of life and in proper 
faith: remember them all, O our Savior. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those who died on mountains, or on the road, living in desert places, 
passing away in the faith, monks and the married, young and old; grant unto 
them all, O Christ, to dwell with the saints. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those who with faith were suddenly taken from this life inopportunely, 
in the midst of joy or sorrow, of prosperity or misfortune: grant rest, our Savior, 
to them all. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those killed by the sword, by falling from their horse, overwhelmed by 
hall, snow or storms, crushed by stones or suffocated in the earth, grant rest, O 
Christ our Savior. 
Glory ..., Strange it is that the Godhead should be one and three, fully 
present in each single Person without division: for the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit are worshipped as one God. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Guide us O Virgin, by thine intercessions, for we 
are buffeted by the stormy waves of sin: and lead us to the safe-haven of 
salvation, delivering us from every danger. 
Katavasia: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only 
Theotokos, * the Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the 
flesh, O Word, * and with fear he glorified Thy power. 
ODE V  
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: O God my spirit seeketh Thee early ...  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Celebrating today, O Lord, the memorial of all who from the ages have died 
in the true faith, we fervently cry to Thee: Grant them rest with all Thy saints. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Those whom Thou hast taken from every generation, Orthodox kings, 
rulers and monks, do Thou O compassionate One, deliver from eternal 
torment. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Thou knowest what is best for all the creatures Thou hast formed: To those 
whom Thou hast permitted to die unexpectedly, by some sudden mishap do 
Thou deliver from every torment, O God. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
From the ever-burning fire, from the darkness without light, from the 
gnashing of teeth and the worm that torments without ceasing, from every 
torment deliver, O our Savior, all who have died in faith. 
Glory ..., One in throne, without beginning, threefold Hypostatic Unity, 
single in Nature yet distinct in Hypostases, unite us in the one will of Thy 
commandments. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou art higher in honor than the fiery 
seraphim, O pure One, for thou hast borne the Him Who is fearful to 
approach, the Savior, Who by taking flesh from thee hath rendered our earthly 
nature godlike. 
Katavasia: O God my spirit seeketh Thee early at dawn, * for the light of 
Thy commandments precede Thy coming: * with them illumine our 
minds, O Master, * and guide us on the path of life. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: Held fast by a multitude of sins ... 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Thou hast loosed the pains of death, having suffered <the Passion>, O our 
God, Thou author of Life: grant rest to Thy servants who have fallen asleep 
from the ages.  
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those whom, according to Thine inscrutable judgments, Thou hast 
permitted to be slain by drugs or by poison, or through choking on bones, grant 
rest, O Lord, with Thy saints. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
When Thou shalt come as judge and all things stand naked before Thy face, 
then in Thy mercy spare, O God, those who served Thee faithfully. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
When Thine Archangel shall sound the last trumpet, awakening all to the 
resurrection of life, then, O Christ, grant rest to Thy servants. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
O God, count all whom Thou hast taken from the ages, the faithful from 
every nation of mankind, worthy to glorify Thee with Thy servants forever. 
Glory ..., Thrice-holy Godhead, One in throne, Father, Son and Spirit, Thou 
art my God, holding all in unity by Thine almighty Power. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Leap for joy, O Jesse the forefather; for from thy 
root hath Sprung forth the Flower of Life that saveth the world, Christ God 
born from the pure Maiden. 
Katavasia: Held fast by a multitude of sins O Lover of mankind, * like 
the Prophet I fall down before Thy tender compassions. * Accept me O 
Lord and save me.  
the small Litany for the reposed, then: 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII; 
With the Saints grant rest, O Christ, * to the souls of Thy servants, * where 
there is neither * pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, * but life everlasting. 
Ikos: Thou alone art immortal, * Who hast created and fashioned man; * 
but We mortals were fashioned from the earth, * and unto earth shall we return, 
* as Thou Who fashioned me didst command and say unto me, * “From earth 
thou art and unto earth shall thou return,” * whither all We mortals are going, * 
making our funeral lament the song: * Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
SYNAXARION READING 
Verse: When Thou O judge of all, shall sit to judge the earth. 
Verse: May Thou judge me also, to hear Thy words: “Come hither.” 
On this day, Soul Saturday, according to the order instituted by our Holy 
Fathers, we call to remembrance all those who have died from the beginning of 
the ages in faith and in the hope of the resurrection and of life eternal. The 
present commemoration of the dead is based on the reality that many of our 
fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters died under such circumstances that 
funeral prayers and normal memorial services could not be offered for them. 
Either in a foreign land or on the seas, on impassable mountains or in gulfs or 

--- PAGE 13 ---
precipices, through starvation or diseases, in wars, in fires, or during 
earthquakes, and in so many other ways, perhaps in poverty or in need, our 
known and unknown brothers and sisters in Christ did not enjoy the chanting 
and necessary spiritual care. Therefore, our Holy Fathers, moved by their love 
for humanity, appointed the present celebration to take place in the Church 
everywhere, having received this from the Holy Apostles, so that all who have 
died through various mishaps or accidents may be remembered together, for 
the benefit of their souls. There is great profit to the soul from these memorials 
in the Church. This is the first reason. The second reason is that since the Holy 
Fathers were going to place the memory of Christ’s Second Coming on the 
following day, Sunday, they appropriately commemorate the souls today, as it 
were, propitiating the fearful Judge, who cannot be deceived, to apply His usual 
compassion and to appoint them to the promised delight. Furthermore, the 
Sunday following tomorrow is dedicated to Adam’s exile from Paradise, after 
which a new life is considered to begin for ourselves. Before this new 
beginning, the present memorial service has as its purpose to warn and frighten 
the living, so that they may meditate on their own death and proceed more 
diligently in the spiritual struggles of Great Lent. After their falling asleep, the 
Judgment shall follow by the Judge who cannot be bribed. We always remember 
the souls of the dead on the Sabbath, for the Sabbath (Saturday) is the day of 
rest. In Hebrew, Sabbath literally means “rest.” As the Jews have this day for 
their repose and paused from every work and professional dealing, we 
Christians have it to remember the repose of our those who preceded us. On 
this day, we hold memorial services and have koliva blessed in the church, give 
alms, and perform various works of mercy. All these practices are of great 
benefit to the departed souls. Since the Orthodox Church does not celebrate 
Divine Liturgies on weekdays during Great Lent where the dead can be 
commemorated, the second, third, and fourth Saturdays of the Fast are 
designated as Soul Saturdays. There are many proofs that the souls of the 
departed can be greatly benefited by what is done in their behalf. St. Marcarios 
the Egyptian once saw the dry skull of a pagan by the road on his way, and 
asked, saying, “Do you ever have any kind of consolation in Hades?” And the 
skull answered, “Yes, Father, especially when you pray for the sake of the dead; 
abundant is the comfort which we then enjoy.” The great man became very 
happy, because he always prayed for the dead and wished to be assured of the 
results of his intercessions. Another saint, Gregory the Dialogist, saved the 
Roman Emperor Trajan through his prayers, although he heard from God 
never to pray like that on be half of an impious non Christian again. Also 
Theodora the Empress, by the prayers of the holy men and confessors, saved 

--- PAGE 14 ---
her husband, the iconoclast Emperor Theophilos abhorred by God, from the 
everlasting torments. In his funeral oration to his brother Caesarios, St. Gregory 
the Theologian recommends alms on behalf of the reposed as being good. And 
the great Chrysostom in his commentary on Philippians says, “Let us think of 
ways to benefit the departed. Let us give them what help we can, namely 
almsgiving and offerings. For truly this brings them great advantage and very 
much gain and benefit. The custom of the priest commemorating those reposed 
in faith over the awesome Mysteries has not been without purpose nor 
arbitrarily ordained and delivered to God’s Church by His all-wise Disciples.” 
Again, “In making arrangements when you dispose of your property, together 
with your children and relatives, let your will also include the name of your 
Judge as a joint heir, and let not the mention of the poor be absent. St. 
Athanasius the Great also says that even if one has died and dissolved into the 
air, do not decline to provide oil and candles at the grave and to plead with 
Christ our God, for they are acceptable to God and bring great recompense: if 
the deceased was a sinner, that you may lose his sins; if righteous, that it may 
add to his reward. If one is a stranger without means, having no one to take 
care of these matters, God, being righteous and compassionate, will 
proportionately measure out to him His mercy, as He knows best. Moreover, he 
who offers such services to the dead also partakes of the reward, because he has 
shown love and concern for the salvation of his neighbor. It is as when one 
anoints a friend with perfumes, he receives the sweet aroma first. As for those 
who do not fulfill the wills and testaments of the deceased concerning these 
matters, they will positively be condemned. Until Christ’s Second Coming, 
whatever is done for the souls of the dead is beneficial, as the Fathers say, 
particularly to those who had done some small good deeds when they were 
among the living. Even if the divine Scriptures declare certain things as needed 
for the chastening of the majority, yet as a rule God’s love for man prevails. For 
if the balance of good and shameful deeds is even, God’s love for man prevails. 
If the scale is weighed down a little by evil deeds, again His exceeding goodness 
prevails. In the other life, everyone will be acquainted even with those whom 
they have never seen before, as the divine Chrysostom says, deducing this from 
the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. All will recognize each other, but not 
from any bodily characteristics. For all shall be one age, and traits from birth 
will be absent. Rather, we shall recognize each other through the soul’s spiritual 
eyes, as St. Gregory the Theologian says in his funeral oration to Caesarios: 
“Then I shall see Caesarios, beaming with joy and glorious, such as you have 
often appeared to me in my dreams, O most beloved of brothers.” St. 
Athanasios the Great also says in his homily on the dead that until the time of 

--- PAGE 15 ---
the universal resurrection it has been granted to the saints to recognize each 
other and revel together, while the sinners, on the other hand, have been 
deprived even of this. Regarding the holy martyrs, they are capable of observing 
our actions and even of visiting us. Then all shall know one another when the 
hidden secrets of every man shall be revealed. We should know that, for the 
time being, the souls of the righteous dwell in certain places set aside for them, 
and the souls of the sinners in their own location. The former rejoice in their 
hope, but the latter grieve in expectation of future suffering. Therefore, the 
saints have not yet received the promised blessings, according to the words of 
the Holy Apostle Paul, who says, “God having provided something better for 
us, that they should not be made perfect apart from us” (Heb. 11:40). We 
should also know that not all who have suffered death by various accidents 
(falling down from precipices, being burned in fires, being sunk in seas, or 
perishing by starvation, poison, frost, and so on) have had such an end as a 
result of God’s command. For these are God’s judgments: some occur with His 
approval, others by His permission. Still others occur as a warning, a threat, or a 
chastisement. By foreknowledge He knows and is aware of everything, and 
everything occurs by His will, as with the sparrows about which the Holy 
Gospel speaks. He does not order that, for example, one man is to die by 
drowning and another to die normally, one as an old man and the other as an 
infant. But once and for all He determined, with some exceptions, the general 
times and various kinds of death in man. Within these constraints do the 
various means of death occur, without God’s determining them precisely from 
the beginning, only knowing. But in relation to the life of each and every 
person, God’s will plans the time and the manner of each one’s death. St. Basil 
the Great speaks about the limits of man’s life, although he is alluding to God’s 
words, “For dust you are, and to dust you shall return” (Gen. 3:19). St. Paul also 
writes to the Corinthians, “For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy manner 
eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the Lord’s body. For this 
reason many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep” (1 Cor. 11:29). 
Here the word sleep refers to death. The Holy Prophet David says, “Do not 
take me away in the midst of my days. Your years are throughout all 
generations”(Ps. 101:25). Again, “You have made my days a few spans, and my 
existence is nothing in your sight” (Ps. 38:6). The Holy King Solomon says, 
“son, honor your father, that you may live many years, and not die before your 
time” (Eccles 3:5 - 6). And the Lord himself, speaking to Eliphaz the Temanite, 
says, “For I will accept him, lest I deal with you according to your folly; because 
you have not spoken of Me what is right, as my servant Job has” (Job 42:8). 
Hence it is evident that there is no set term of life. Or, if there is one, it is 

--- PAGE 16 ---
whatever God wills. For as He so wishes He adds to or deletes from the time of 
the life of this or that individual, administering all things for our benefit. And 
when He so wills, God arranges both the place and the time of repose. 
According to St. Athanasios the Great, the term of each person’s life is set by 
the will and counsel of God: “Through the depths of Thy judgments shalt Thou 
care for all, O Christ.” According to St. Basil the Great, death comes as soon as 
the term of life has been fulfilled; by the words term of life, God’s will is meant. 
For if the term of life had already been determined, then for what do we need 
God, or even a physician? And why do we pray for our children? One ought to 
know that baptized infants who die shall enjoy the bliss of Paradise; those not 
baptized and those of the heathen shall go neither to the place of bliss nor to 
Hades. When the soul has left the body, it no longer has any concern for earthly 
things but is continually concerned with matters in the next life. We celebrate 
the first memorial service on the third day after death, because by the third day 
the dead one’s appearance is altered. We serve the second memorial service on 
the ninth day after death, because by this day the entire body is dissolved, 
except for the heart. We serve the third memorial service on the fortieth day, 
for by this day the heart has deteriorated. The same progression, in reverse 
order, is made at birth: by the third day after conception the heart is formed; by 
the ninth day the flesh is fashioned, and by the fortieth day the full form 
appears. 
O Master Christ, set the souls of Thy departed servants in the tabernacles  
of Thy righteous, and have mercy upon us and save us, 
as Thou alone art the Immortal One. Amen 
ODE VII 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: O Thou who in the beginning ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Celebrating the memory of those who from the ages have passed away in 
the true faith, we cry aloud: Blessed art Thou unto all the ages, O Lord God of 
our fathers.  
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Grant rest O God, to the faithful that have fallen asleep, who have perished 
suddenly, struck by some weapon of iron, wood or stone. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
At Thy dread coming, O Compassionate One, place at Thy right hand with 
Thy sheep all those who in life served Thee in the Orthodox faith O Christ, and 
have now departed to Thee. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Grant to Thy servants, O Christ, a place in the choir of Thine elect, that they 
may cry aloud to Thee: Blessed art Thou throughout the ages, O Lord God of 
our fathers. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Thou hast fashioned our flesh from the dust of the earth, O merciful Savior, 
and quickened it by the Spirit: grant rest, O God, to those whom Thou hast 
taken, in the life that groweth not old. 
Glory ..., Let us praise the Godhead, one in Nature but threefold in 
Hypostasis, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, three Suns, but singular in light. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: With the words of David we sing to thee in 
unison, O Virgin, calling thee the mountain of God: for the Word dwelt within 
thee in the flesh, wherein He spiritually rendered our nature godlike. 
Katavasia: O Thou who in the beginning founded the earth * and by Thy 
word made the heavens firm, * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, * 
O Lord God of our Fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Thou hast destroyed the shadow of death of old, and shone forth from the 
tomb as the rising sun: O Lord of glory, make all those from every age who 
died in faith sons of Thy Resurrection. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Thou who knowest things obscure and hidden, when Thou shalt come to 
reveal the works of darkness and the counsels of our hearts, then exact not 
what is due of all who have fallen asleep in faith. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
When Thou shalt come to sit upon the throne and shalt summon with the 
trumpet all mankind from the ends of the earth, commanding them to stand 
before Thee for judgment, then spare us all, O Christ, in that Thou art merciful. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
Those of the faithful who died suddenly by accident, crying out violently, 
and running swiftly, or were struck on the face or trampled underfoot, do Thou 
forgive, O Lord of glory, unto the ages.  
Verse: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord.  
As a Unity in Essence I sing Thy praises; as a Trinity in Hypostases I 
venerate Thee, Father, Son and Most holy Spirit. The power of Thy 
beginningless Kingdom do I glorify throughout the ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou hast been revealed, O Virgin Theotokos, 
as a sealed fountain of living water. For without man thou hast given birth to 
the Lord, and thou dost grant the faithful to drink from the waters of 
immortality throughout the ages. 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the 
mystery of the Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning 
bush: * praise ye and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Canon of the temple, then: 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Where Thy saints dwell in joy, O Lord, grant that all from every age who 
have fallen asleep in the faith, and in hope, may also rejoice.  
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those who have died by the wrath of God: struck down by thunderbolts 
from heaven, swallowed by the earth, or drowned in the sea; to all the faithful 
grant rest, O Christ 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those from every age in life: old and young, children and the suckling 
new-born, male and female. To all the faithful Thou hast taken Grant rest, O 
God. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 
To those killed by poisonous bites, swallowed by serpents, trampled 
underfoot by horses, strangled or hanged by their neighbors. Grant rest to all 
who worshipped Thee in faith. 
Refrain: Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy departed servants. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
We remember by name each of the faithful who died in every generation 
from the ages: grant that, at Thy coming, they may stand before Thee 
uncondemned. 
Glory ..., O God, One in Three, glory be to Thee without ceasing. For each 
is God, yet Father, Son and Spirit are one in Nature, a threefold radiant 
distinctness. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thy childbearing transcends understanding, for 
thou hast given birth to Him who was before all that is, and with milk ineffably 
fed Him who feedeth the whole world, and held Him who doth uphold the 
universe, Christ our only Redeemer, O all-immaculate One. 
Katavasia: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the 
fire of the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the 
salvation of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we 
magnify thee. 
The usual small Litany. 
Exapostilarion, in Tone III; 
As Thou art God Who hast authority over both the living and the dead, * 
grant rest to Thy servants in the dwelling-place of the elect, * for though they 
have sinned, O Savior, ** yet they turned not away from Thee. 
Glory ..., Grant rest to Thy servants, O Lord, in the land of the living * from 
which have fled pain, sorrow and sighing. * O Lover of mankind be merciful to 
the sins that they committed in this life: * for Thou alone art sinless and 
merciful, ** O Master of the dead and the living. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Mary, Bride of God, pray without ceasing 
unto Christ * on behalf of us thy servants, * that with the prophets inspired by 
God, * and the companies of the martyrs, * of hierarchs, holy monks and all the 
righteous, ** we may become fellow-heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII:  
Spec. Mel.: “The Paradise in Eden ...”: 
Come, all ye brethren, before the end, * and let us all look upon our form, * 
upon the infirmity, and callousness of our nature. * Let us behold our end, and 
the organs of the vessel of our flesh. * Let us see that man is but dust, food for 
worms, and corruption; * that our bones grow dry, and have no breath of life in 
them. * Let us gaze on the tombs. * Where is man’s glory? Where his outward 
beauty? * Where the eloquent tongue? Where the noble brow, * and where the 
eye? * All is but dust and a shadow. ** Therefore, O Savior, spare us all. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Why doth man deceive himself and boast? * Why doth he trouble himself in 
vain? * For he is but earth, and soon to the earth will he return. * Why doth the 
dust not reflect upon its formation from clay, * and that it shall be cast out as 
dung and corruption? * Yet though We men are but clay, why do we cling so 
closely to the earth? * For if we are Christ’s kindred, should we not run to Him, 
* leaving this mortal and fleeting life, * and seek life incorruptible, ** which is 
Christ Himself, the illumination of our souls? 
Thou hast formed Adam with Thine own hand, * and placed him on the 
border between incorruption and mortality, O Savior, * and granting him life 
through grace, Thou hast freed him from corruption, * translating him to the 
life that he first enjoyed. * Grant rest, O Master, to Thy servants whom Thou 
hast taken from us; * may they rest with the righteous in the choir of Thine 
elect; * write their names in the book of life; raise them with the sound of the 
Archangel’s trump, ** and grant them Thy heavenly Kingdom. 
Christ is risen, releasing from bondage Adam the first-formed man * and 
destroying the power of Hades. * Be of good courage, all ye dead, * for death is 
slain and Hades despoiled; * and Christ hath assumed Kingship. * He hath 
granted incorruption to our flesh; * He hath raised us and granted us 
resurrection, * and He doth make worthy of His joy and glory ** all who, with 
unwavering faith, fervently trust in Him. 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
As a flower withereth and a dream passeth away, * so is each man’s flesh 
dissolved at death. * But at the sound of the trumpet all the dead, * as in an 
earthquake, * shall rise again to meet Thee, Christ God. * Then, Master, grant 
unto all Thy servants * whom Thou hast taken from us, ** to dwell in the 
tabernacles of Thy saints.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
Rejoice, O Theotokos Mary, * thou indestructible and surpassingly holy 
temple; * as the prophet crieth out: ** Holy is thy temple, wondrous in 
righteousness!  
The small doxology:  
Then the Litany: Let us complete ..., 
On the Aposticha: We chant the Stichera of the reposed by Theophanes 
in the Tone of the Week from the Oktoechos, then: 
Glory ..., for the reposed, by St. John of Damascus, in Tone VI: 

--- PAGE 21 ---
By eating from the tree * Adam was brought to grief in the days of old in 
Eden, * through the poison of the serpent; * for in this way death entered, * 
devouring the whole race of mankind. * But the Master by His coming * hath 
destroyed the dragon and bestowed upon us rest. * To Him, therefore, let us cry 
aloud: * Spare, O Savior, those whom Thou hast taken, ** and grant them rest 
with Thine elect. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI:  
Thou art our God, Who in Wisdom * hath created and perfected all things. 
* Thou hast sent prophets, O Christ, to foretell Thine advent, * and apostles to 
proclaim Thy majesty; * the former prophesied of Thy coming, * and the later 
illumined the nations by baptism, * while the martyrs through their sufferings 
received their expectation. * With Her who gave birth to Thee, * they all 
intercede before Thee: * Do Thou grant rest, O God, * to the souls of those 
whom Thou hast taken; * and, deem us worthy of Thy Kingdom, * O my 
Redeemer and my God, * Who didst endure the Cross on my behalf, ** the 
condemned one.  
Then: 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
The Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
O Thou Who by the depth of Thy wisdom * dost provide all things out of 
love for man, * and grantest unto all that which is profitable, O only Creator: * 
Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy servants; ** for in Thee have they 
placed their hope, O our Creator and Fashioner and God. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
In thee do we have a rampart and calm haven * and an intercessor 
acceptable to God, ** Whom thou didst bear, O Theotokos unwedded, thou 
salvation of the faithful. 
Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and the Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
AT LITURGY 
The Typica and the Beatitudes. On the Beatitudes we chant 4 Troparia 
from ODE III of the Canon at Matins, and 4 Troparia from ODE VI. 
To those who have passed through the course of this life in the glory of 
piousness, do Thou O God, make worthy to be adorned with a crown of 
righteousness, and may they enjoy eternal blessings. 
To those who have been suddenly snatched away, burnt by lightning, frozen 
by cold, or struck down by any other calamity, grant rest, O God, when Thou 
shalt try all things by fire. 
To those who have sailed across the ever-troubled sea of this life, grant safe 
anchorage O Christ, in the harbor of immortal life with Thee, nurtured by an 
Orthodox life. 
Those whom the creatures of the sea or the birds of the air have devoured, 
by Thy judgments O Christ God, raise up in glory on the Last Day. 
Thou hast loosed the pains of death, having suffered <the Passion>, O our 
God, Thou author of Life: grant rest to Thy servants who have fallen asleep 
from the ages.  
To those whom, according to Thine inscrutable judgments, Thou hast 
permitted to be slain by drugs or by poison, or through choking on bones, grant 
rest, O Lord, with Thy saints. 
Glory ..., Thrice-holy Godhead, One in throne, Father, Son and Spirit, Thou 
art my God, holding all in unity by Thine almighty Power. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Leap for joy, O Jesse the forefather; for from thy 
root hath Sprung forth the Flower of Life that saveth the world, Christ God 
born from the pure Maiden. 
At the Entrance: The Troparion of the day, in Tone VIII: 
O Thou Who by the depth of Thy wisdom dost provide all things out of 
love for mankind, and grantest unto all that which is profitable, O only Creator: 
Grant rest, O Lord, to the souls of Thy servants; for in Thee have they placed 
their hope, O Creator and Fashioner and God. 
Kontakion of the day in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., With the Saints grant rest, O Christ, * to the souls of Thy servants, 
* where there is neither * pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, * but life everlasting. 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Both now ..., In thee do we have a rampart and calm haven * and an 
intercessor acceptable to God, Whom thou didst bear, ** O Theotokos 
unwedded, thou salvation of the faithful. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
Verse: Unto Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul: my God, I have put my 
trust in Thee  
1st EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS (10:23-28) 
Brethren: All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all 
things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no man seek his own, but 
every man another’s wealth. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking 
no question for conscience sake: For the earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness 
thereof. If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to 
go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. 
But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for 
his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake: for the earth is the Lord’s, and 
the fullness thereof:  
 
1st EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS (4:13-17) 
Brethren: I would not have you to be ignorant, concerning them which are 
asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe 
that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we 
which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them 
which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in 
Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we 
ever be with the Lord. 
Alleluia in Tone VI: 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. 
Verse: Their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (21 : 8-9, 25-27, 33-36) 
 The Lord spake unto His disciples saying: Take heed that ye be not 
deceived: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and the time 
draweth near: go ye not therefore after them. But when ye shall hear of wars 
and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but 
the end is not by and by. And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, 
and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea 
and the waves roaring; Men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after 
those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be 
shaken. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power 
and great glory. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass 
away. And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged 
with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come 
upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the 
face of the whole earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be 
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand 
before the Son of man. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (5: 24-30) 
The Lord spake unto the Jews who came unto Him, saying: Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath 
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death 
unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. 
For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in 
himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is 
the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that 
are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the 
resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: 
and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the 
Father which hath sent me. 
Communion verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and hast taken 
to Thyself, O Lord: and their memorial is unto generation and generation. 
Alleluia (Thrice). 
