--- PAGE 1 ---
MEATFARE SUNDAY  
 THE SUNDAY OF THE LAST JUDGMENT  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera, 6 Resurrection Stichera. 
Then, 4 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone VI:  
When Thou shalt come, O most righteous Judge, * to execute the just 
judgment, * seated on Thy throne of glory, * the frightening river of fire will 
draw all mankind * before Thy judgment seat; * the heavenly powers will stand 
beside Thee, * and in fear mankind will be judged according to the deeds that 
each has done. * With faith we entreat Thee O Christ, * since Thou art 
compassionate * spare us then, and grant us a place among those who are saved.  
The books will be opened * and the deeds of all mankind will be revealed * 
before the dread judgment seat; * the whole vale of sorrow shall echo * with the 
fearful and despairing sounds of lamentation, * at seeing all who have sinned 
being sent by Thy just judgment * to everlasting torment, weeping in vain. * 
Therefore we beseech Thee, O compassionate One: * Spare us who hymn Thy 
praises, ** for Thou alone art plenteous in mercy.  
The trumpets shall sound and the tombs shall be emptied, * and all mankind 
shall be raised in trembling. * Those that have done good shall rejoice in 
gladness, * awaiting to receive their reward; * those that have sinned shall 
tremble and in grief lament, * as they are separated from the chosen and sent to 
torment. * O Lord of glory, be merciful to us as Thou art compassionate, ** and 
grant us to dwell * with those that have loved Thee.  
I lament and weep when I contemplate the eternal fire, * the outer darkness 
and Tatar, * the dread worm and the unceasing gnashing of teeth, * and the 
anguish that shall befall those who have sinned immeasurably, * by their 
wickedness arousing Thee to anger O supremely good One. * Among them I, 
the miserable one, am first: ** But, O Judge in Thy mercy save me, for Thou art 
lovingly compassionate.  
 Glory ..., from the Triodion, in Tone VIII: 
When the thrones are set-up and the books opened, * and God siteth in 
judgment, * O what fear there shall be then, * with the angels standing in Thy 
presence trembling * and the river of fire flowing before Thee, * what shall we 
do then, who are guilty of a multitude of sins? * When we hear Him calling the 
blessed ones of His Father into the Kingdom, * but sending sinners to torment. * 
Who shall endure His fearful condemnation? * But, O Savior Who alone lovest 
mankind, * King of the ages, * before the end cometh ** turn me back through 
repentance and have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., the Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
After the entrance, “O Joyous Light ...”:  
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
The Resurrection Aposticha in the Tone of the week. Then: 
Glory ..., from the Triodion, in Tone VIII:  
Alas, O darkened soul! * How long wilt thou turn not away from 
wickedness? * How long wilt thou recline in idleness? * Why dost thou not think 
of the fearful hour of death? * Why dost thou not tremble at the dread judgment 
seat of the Savior? * What answer wilt thou give then, or what wilt thou say? * 
Thy works will stand in accusation of thee; * thine actions will reproach thee and 
condemn thee. * O my soul, the time draweth near; * make haste before it is too 
late, and cry aloud in faith: * “I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned against Thee; 
* but I know O Lover of mankind, Thy compassion, * deprive me not O good 
Shepherd, of a place at Thy right hand ** for the sake of Thy great and abundant 
mercy.”  
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII:  
O unwedded Virgin! * thou who ineffably conceived God in the flesh, * 
Mother of God Most High: * accept the supplications of thy servants, O all-
immaculate one, * granting unto all cleansing of transgressions; * and, accepting 
now our supplications, ** pray thou that we all be saved. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, 
** for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
 Blessed be the Name of the Lord and the rest.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the usual Troparia, in the Tone of the week: 
After the 1st and 2nd readings from the Psalter, The Sessional Hymns of 
the Resurrection, in the Tone of the week:  
Then the Polyeleos with the addition of the following, Psalm 136, in Tone VI: 
PSALM 136 
By the waters of Babylon, there we sat down and we wept when we 
remembered Zion. Alleluia. Upon the Willows in the midst thereof did we hang 
our instruments. Alleluia. For there, they that had taken us captive asked us for 
Words of song. Alleluia. And they that had led us away asked us for a hymn, 
saying: Sing us one of the songs of Zion. Alleluia. How shall we sing the Lord’s 
song in a strange land? Alleluia. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand 
be forgotten. Alleluia. Let my tongue cleave to my throat, if I remember thee 
not, Alleluia. If I set not Jerusalem above all other, as at the head of my joy. 
Alleluia. Remember, O Lord, the sons of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem, 
Alleluia. Who said: Lay waste, lay waste to her, even to the foundations thereof. 
Alleluia. O daughter of Babylon, thou wretched one, blessed shall he be who 
shall reward thee Wherewith thou hast rewarded us. Alleluia. Blessed shall he be 
who shall seize and dash thine infants against the rock. Alleluia (Thrice) 
Then the Resurrectional Verses: (THE EVLOGITARIA ) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes; and the rest. 
Then the small Litany, after which, the Sessional Hymn, the Hymns of 
Ascent, the Prokeimenon, and Let every breath ..., all in the Tone of the 
week. Then The Sunday Resurrection Gospel. After which: 
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ etc. 
Psalm 50. Then the following Hymns of compunction, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., The gates of repentance, do Thou open unto me, O Giver of Life, 
* for early in the morning my spirit seeketh Thy holy temple, * bearing the 
temple of my body all defiled. * But as One who art compassionate * cleanse it 
by Thy loving-kindness and mercy.  
 Both now ..., Guide me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos: * for I 
have polluted my soul with shameful deeds * and wasted all my life in 
slothfulness. * but by thine intercessions * do thou deliver me from all impurity.  
In Tone VI:  
Have mercy upon me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy: * and 
according to the multitude of Thy compassion * blot out my transgressions.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
In Tone VIII: As I the wretched one ponder the multitude of evil deeds I 
have done, * I tremble for fear of the dread day of judgment. * But trusting in 
Thy compassionate mercy, * like David do I cry unto Thee: * “Have mercy upon 
me, O God, according to Thy great mercy.”  
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” and the canons: 
ODE I 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: A helper and a protector hath become unto me ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
I tremble with fear when I contemplate the dread day of Thine ineffable 
coming, I fear when I foresee Thee sitting in judgment of the living and the dead, 
O mine all-powerful God.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
When Thou shalt come, O God, with thousands of the heavenly hosts of 
angels, deem me the wretched one O Christ, worthy to meet Thee in the clouds.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Come, O my soul, and call to mind the very hour and day when God shall 
stand before thee visibly; lament and weep, and thus be found pure in the hour 
of the trial.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The unquenchable fire of Gehenna, the bitter worm and the gnashing of 
teeth, terrorize me and fill me with awe. But do Thou O Christ, release me and 
forgive me, and number me among Thine elect.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Grant that I, wretched as I am, may hear Thy greatly desired voice, which 
doth call Thy saints to joy, that I also may attain the inexpressible enjoyment of 
the Kingdom of Heaven.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Enter not into judgment with me, recalling my deeds, examining my words 
and correcting my urgings. But in Thy compassion overlook my wickedness and 
save me, O all-powerful One.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Glory ..., Unity in three Hypostasis, Sovereign Lord of all, perfect and 
beginningless God, the Father, Son and most holy Spirit, save us.  
Both now ..., Who, according to the law of nature, hath ever begotten a son 
not sown by a father? Yet such a Son the Father hath begotten without a mother. 
O most wondrous marvel! For thou O pure One, hast borne both God and man.  
Katavasia in Tone VI: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me 
salvation. * My God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I 
will exalt Him * for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
ODE III 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock of Thy commandments ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Lord cometh, and who shall endure the fear of Him? Who shall dare 
appear before Him? But do thou prepare thyself to meet Him, O my soul.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Let us make haste before it is too late; let us lament, let us be reconciled to 
God before the end. For fearful is the judgment at which all of us shall stand 
naked.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Have mercy, O Lord, have mercy upon me, I cry to Thee, when Thou 
comest with Thine angels to render to every man his due reward for his deeds.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
How shall I endure the wrath of Thy judgment, for I have not hearkened 
unto Thy commandments? But spare, O spare me in the hour of judgment.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Turn back, O wretched soul, sighing, before the fair-ground of life cometh 
to an end, before the Lord shuteth the door of the bridal chamber.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Lord, I have sinned as no other man hath sinned, I have transgressed 
more than any man: before the day of judgment, be merciful to me O Lover of 
mankind.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., O simple Unity praised in a Trinity of Hypostases, uncreated 
beginningless Nature, save us who in faith worship Thy power.  
Both now ..., O most pure One, by a seedless conception thou hast given 
birth to the living Word, Who without change assumed flesh in thy womb. Glory 
be to thy birthgiving, O Mother of God.  
Katavasia: O Lord, upon the rock of Thy commandments * make firm my 
fickle heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord.  
Sessional Hymns from the Triodion, in Tone VI:  
When I contemplate the fearful day, * and weep over my evil deeds, * how 
shall I answer the immortal King, * with what justification shall I look upon the 
Judge, * prodigal that I am. * O compassionate Father, * only begotten Son, and 
Holy Spirit, ** have mercy on me. 
Glory ..., O what lamentation there will be in that place, * when Thou, O 
compassionate One, * dost sit to execute Thy righteous judgment; * disclose not 
my secret sins, * nor shame me before the Angels, ** but be compassionate O 
God and have mercy on me.  
 Both now ..., O thou good Virgin Theotokos, * the hope of the world, * we 
beg thine intercession which alone is mighty: * have compassionate mercy upon 
us, * a people bereft of an intercessor; * beseech the merciful God, that our souls 
be delivered from every threat, ** O thou who alone art blessed!  
ODE IV 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: The prophet heard of thy coming, O Lord..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
 The day is upon us, the judgment is at the door. Be vigilant, my soul, Kings 
and princes, rich and poor are gathering and each shall receive their due reward 
for their actions.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Each in his own order, monk and hierarch, old and young, slave and master 
shall be examined; widow and virgin shall be corrected. And woe to all whose 
lives are not guiltless!  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Thy judgment is without respect of persons; no cunning words or eloquence 
can deceive it; nor shall false witnesses pervert Thy righteousness. For in Thy 
sight, O God, every secret shall stand revealed.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Let me not come into the valley of lamentation, let me not see the place of 
darkness, O my Christ and Word; let me not be bound hand and foot, and cast 
out from Thy bridal chamber, for in my utter wretchedness I have defiled the 
garment of incorruption that hath been given me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
When Thou shalt separate the sinners from the righteous whilst judging the 
world, number me as one of Thy sheep and place me not with the goats, O 
Lover of mankind, that I may hear the voice of Thy blessing.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
When the trial taketh place and the books recording all our deeds shall be 
opened, O miserable soul, what shalt thou answer before the judgment-seat, 
lacking all fruits of righteousness to offer unto Christ thy Creator?  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Hearing the words of lamentation of the rich man in the flames of torment, 
I, the wretched one, weep and wail, for I am deserving of the same 
condemnation. Wherefore I entreat Thee: Have mercy on me, O Savior of the 
world, at the hour of judgment.  
Glory ..., I glorify the Son Who hath come forth from the Father, and the 
Spirit, as light and rays from the Sun: the One begotten as an Offspring, the 
Other proceeding and sent forth; divine and coeternal Trinity, worshiped by all 
creation.  
Both now ..., She who hath given birth yet kept her virginity, hath borne 
both God and man, a single Person with a twofold nature. This thy miracle, O 
Virgin Mother, doth fill every ear and mind with wonder.  
Katavasia: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was 
afraid. * How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto 
mankind? * and he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * 
glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
ODE V 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
There shall be fear and trembling beyond all description there: for the Lord 
shall come and test the works of every man. And who then will not mourn for 
himself?  

--- PAGE 8 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The river of fire disquietens and consumes me; the gnashing of teeth grinds 
me, and the abyss dismays me, how or what shall I do to gain God’s mercy?  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Spare, O Lord, spare Thy servant; deliver me not unto the bitter tormentors, 
unto the cruel angels in Hades, by whom I shall never find rest.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Prince and governor together, the rich and the inglorious, great and small 
alike will be tried. Woe unto him that hath not prepared himself beforehand!  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Pardon, remit and forgive, O Lord, all my sins against Thee; and show me 
not condemned, in the presence of the angels, to the punishment of fire and 
unending shame.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Spare, O spare the Thy creation, O Lord. I have sinned, forgive me: for 
Thou alone art pure by nature, and none save Thee is free from defilement.  
Glory ..., A single Unity by nature, I praise Thee O Trinity, as beginningless, 
incomprehensible, supreme in sovereignty, a unity beyond perfection, God, Light 
and Life, the Creator of the world.  
Both now ..., In thy childbearing, in a supra-natural manner, the laws of 
nature were rendered mute, O pure one. For without seed thou hast given birth 
to the pre-eternal God, begotten from the Father.  
Katavasia: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, 
O Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach 
me, O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
ODE VI 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
At Thy fearful coming, O Christ, when Thou shall appear from heaven and 
set up the thrones, and the books shall be opened, then spare, O Savior, spare 
Thy creature.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Since God is the Judge, nothing can help thee there, no zeal, no skill, no 
glory, no friendship, but only the strength that thou hast gained, O my soul, from 
thy works.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
There will be found together both Prince and governor, rich and poor O my 
soul; no father or mother will be able to help us, no brother will deliver us from 
the condemnation.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Think, my soul, of the fearful examination before the Judge; trembling from 
this prepare thy defense, lest thou be condemned to the eternal chains.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Lord, may I not hear Thee say, “Take what is due thee,” as Thou dost 
send me from Thy presence; neither let me hear Thee say, “Depart from Me into 
the fire of the accursed,” but may I hear those words desired by the righteous.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Deliver me, O Lord, from the gates of Hades, from the lowest depths of the 
earth and the lightless darkness, from the unquenchable fire, and from all the 
other everlasting torments.  
Glory ..., I sing the praises of the Triune Godhead, the Father, Son and 
divine Spirit, one sovereign Principle divided in three Hypostases.  
Both now ..., Thou art the gate through which God alone hath passed, 
entering in and coming out, yet not breaking the seal of thy virginity O pure one: 
Jesus, the Creator of Adam, and thy Son.  
Katavasia: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the all-compassionate God, 
* and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised up my 
life from corruption. 
Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone I:  
When Thou comest, O God, upon the earth with glory, * the whole world 
will tremble. * The river of fire will flow before Thy judgment seat, * the books 
shall be opened and secrets revealed. * Deliver me then, from the unquenchable 
fire, ** and deem me worthy to stand on Thy right hand, O Judge most 
righteous.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Ikos: Thinking of Thy fearful judgment-seat and the day of Judgment O 
supremely good One, I tremble and am filled with fear, for mine own conscience 
accuseth me. No-one then will be able to deny their sins, for truth shall accuse 
them, and fear will constrain them. For great will be the trepidation from the 
flames of Gehenna there, the sinners gnashing their teeth. Wherefore, before the 
end have mercy on me, and spare me, O Judge most righteous.  
SYNAXARION READING 
Verse: When Thou shalt sit to judge the world, O Judge of All.  
Verse: Count me worthy of Thy summons to Thy right hand.  
On this day we commemorate the inescapable second coming of Christ, 
ordained by the most divine Fathers to be observed after the second parable of 
the Prodigal, so that no one who has learned of the love of God for mankind 
from it will live in laziness saying, “God loves mankind, and when I am separated 
from Him by sin, all is prepared for my restoration.” This fearsome day of 
judgment has been designated for commemoration at this point in time, that 
through fear of death and the expectation of future torment, those who live in 
laziness may be encouraged to the virtues, not trusting only in the love of God, 
but also realizing that He is the righteous Judge who will judge all men according 
to their deeds. In other words those souls who have passed over are obliged to 
undergo judgment. And this present feast is a type of symbol of this in that it is 
presented now as a final celebration just as it will be the last event after our 
death. For it behooves us to contemplate that as the beginning of the world and 
Adam’s fall from Paradise are commemorated on the following Sunday, so this 
day is the end of all days and of the world itself. The commemoration is 
appointed for this day of Meatfare, that in awe of this event we should limit our 
intake of earthly food, not giving ourselves over to gluttony, and be encouraged 
to love our neighbor. In other words, since we were banished from Eden, cursed 
and condemned through eating of the fruit, so the present event has been 
ordained at this time, as next Sunday we will be banished through Adam, until 
Christ comes again to raise us up to Paradise. It is called the second coming, 
since Christ appeared to us at His first coming in the flesh and delivered the 
human race, and He will come again to judge whether that which He 
commanded us has been observed. And when will this second coming occur? No 
one knows; for although He mentioned several preceding signs, the Lord 
concealed it from His Apostles. Before His coming the antichrist will appear. He 
will live his life after the manner of Christ, performing miracles like those which 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Christ performed, and raising the dead. Yet all that he does will be an illusion. 
After this suddenly like lightning from heaven the Lord will come, going before 
His holy Cross, and a river of boiling fire will go before Him, cleansing the earth 
of its defilement. The antichrist will be seized immediately along with his 
servants and will be committed to eternal fire. And when the angels sound the 
trumpets, all the nations of mankind will gather from all places and from all the 
ends of the earth in Jerusalem, for it is the center of the earth. And there the 
thrones will be set for judgment. Then all souls will be reunited with their bodies 
and clothed in incorruptible beauty, transformed into one likeness. And with one 
word the Lord will separate the righteous from the sinners. Those who have 
done good will receive eternal life, and the sinners will be once more sent to 
eternal and everlasting torment. Let it be noted that Christ will not ask who 
fasted, or who was naked, or who performed miracles, for although these things 
are good, mercy and compassion are far better. He will question both the 
righteous and the sinners on six commandment-like virtues, of which everyone is 
capable: “For I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me 
drink. I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me. I was sick, 
and ye visited me. I was in prison, and ye came to me. Inasmuch as ye have done 
it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me.” Then all will 
confess the Lord Jesus Christ in the glory of God the Father. Now the torments, 
according to the Holy Gospel are weeping and the gnashing of teeth, where their 
worm dies not and the fire is not quenched, and he shall be cast into outer 
darkness. For all the Church of God will joyfully delight in attaining the 
Kingdom of Heaven, being close to God in His holy place, and receiving 
everlasting glory and exaltation. But those who are separated from God through 
wasting the life of their souls in laziness and temporal nourishment will receive 
torment and darkness, and be eternally deprived of the divine radiance. 
In Thine ineffable love for mankind, O Christ our God, make us worthy of Thy 
voice, which we long to hear, number us among those at Thy right hand, and 
have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: We have sinned, and we have transgressed ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
O ye faithful, let us fall down and lament before the day of judgment doth 
come, when the heavens shall be destroyed, the stars shall fall and all the earth 
shall be shaken, that at the end we may receive mercy from the God of our 
fathers.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The trial shall be without respect of persons, and the judgment shall be 
fearful; nothing shall be kept secret from the Judge, no favor can be won with 
bribes. But spare me, O Master, and deliver me from all Thy fearful wrath.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Lord doth come to judge: who can endure the sight of Him? Tremble, 
O my wretched soul, tremble and by thy deeds prepare for thy repose, that thou 
mayest gain mercy and compassion from the blessed God of thy fathers.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
I am disquieted when I think of the unquenchable fire. The bitter worm, the 
gnashing of teeth, and soul-destroying Hades doth terrify me; yet there is no 
compunction to be found in me. But O Lord, O Lord, before the end, establish 
me in the fear of Thee.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
I fall down before Thee, and I offer Thee as tears my words. I have sinned 
as the harlot never sinned, and I have transgressed as no other on earth. But O 
Master have compassion upon me Thy creature, and call me back.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Turn back O soul, repent, and uncover all that thou hast hidden. Say unto 
God to Whom all things are known: Thou alone knowest my secrets, O Savior; 
do Thou Thyself have mercy on me, as David doth sing, according to Thy 
mercy.  
Glory ..., I sing the praises of the Three, one in Essence, of the One that is 
three in Hypostases: the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, one power, one will, one 
energy, one thrice-holy God, one sovereign Kingdom.  
Both now ..., God hath come forth in beauty from the chamber of thy 
womb. As a King clothed in a divinely-woven robe dyed mystically in thy most 
pure blood, O unwedded one, He doth reign over the earth.  
Katavasia: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil 
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but 
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
ODE VIII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Lord, when I contemplate meeting Thee at Thy fearful second coming, I 
tremble in awe, and fear Thy wrath. In that hour deliver me, I cry, and save me 
throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Who among those born on earth, beset by the passions, shall dare to stand 
before Thee O God who judgeth all things? For at that time, the unquenchable 
fire and the gnawing worm shall seize the condemned and hold them throughout 
the ages.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
All that has breath, shalt Thou call together to be judged O Christ. Then 
great shall be the fear, and great the anguish; and only our good actions shall help 
us throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O my God and Lord, Judge of all, on that day may I hear Thy desired voice, 
may I see Thy great light, may I look upon Thy tabernacles, may I behold Thy 
glory and rejoice throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O righteous Judge and Savior, have mercy on me and deliver me from the 
fire and from the punishments I deserve at the Judgment. Before the end 
cometh, grant me remission through virtue and repentance.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
When Thou sittest in judgment, O compassionate One, and revealest Thy 
dread glory, O Christ, what fear there will be then! the fiery furnace, and unto all 
those who shall be seized with fear, Thine inescapable judgment-seat.  
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
I honor God one in Essence, I sing the praises of the three Hypostasis, 
distinct one from another yet not differing in essence, for there is one Godhead 
in the three Hypostases, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Both now ..., From thy most radiant womb, Christ hath come forth as a 
bridegroom from his chamber, and as a great light He hath illumined those in 
darkness. As the Sun of Righteousness he hath shone forth, O pure one, 
enlightening the world.  
Refrain: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, chanting and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom 
tremble the Cherubim and Seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * 
praise, bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving of a seedless conception 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Lord shall come to punish sinners and to save the righteous. Let us 
weep and lament, and call to mind that day, when our hidden and secret sins will 
be revealed and He will reward each according to what they are due.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Moses was filled with fear and trembling when he saw Thy hind parts. How 
then shall I, the wretched one, endure to behold Thy face, when Thou shalt 
come from heaven? But spare me, O compassionate One, by thy merciful gaze.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Daniel feared the hour of trial, what then shall I, the wretched one, feel, 
when I come O Lord, to that dreadful day? But grant me before my end to 
worship Thee worthily and to gain Thy Kingdom.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The fire is ready, the worm hath prepared itself; yet rejoicing, glory, eternal 
rest, the never-setting light, the gladness of the righteous also await. And who is 
blessed, if not but he who doth escape the former, and inheriteth the later?  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
May I not be rejected from Thy presence O Lord, in Thine anger; may I not 
hear Thy voice casting me off, as one accursed, to the fire. But rather let me 
enter then into the joy of Thine eternal bridal-chamber with Thy saints.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
My mind hath been wounded, my body hath grown feeble, my spirit hath 
become weak, my speech hath lost its power, and my life hath become deadened, 
the end approacheth. What then shalt thou do, O wretched soul, when the Judge 
cometh to examine thy deeds?  
Glory ..., O Father, single only-Begetter of the only-begotten Son; O only 
Light and Effulgence from the one and only Light; and Thou, one and only Holy 
Spirit from the one God, the Lord from the Lord Who truly is: O Holy Trinity in 
One, save me who doth theologize Thee.  
Both now ..., The marvel of thy childbearing hath filled me with wonder, O 
all-immaculate One. How didst thou conceive without seed Him whom none can 
comprehend? How didst thou remain a Virgin and yet give birth as a Mother? 
Accept with faith that which is above nature, and worship the Child that is born: 
For all that He doth will, He hath the power to do. 
Katavasia: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion for the Resurrection Gospel of the week, then: 
From the Triodion, in Tone III: 
As I ponder the fearful day of Thy judgment, * and Thine ineffable glory, * I 
am altogether filled with dread, O Lord, * and trembling with fear I cry to Thee: 
* “When Thou comest in glory to earth, * to judge all things O Christ our God, * 
do Thou deliver me from every torment * and deem me worthy, O Master, ** to 
stand at Thy right hand.  
Glory ..., Another Exapostilarion from the Triodion 
Behold! the day of the Lord almighty cometh, * and who shall endure the 
fear of His coming? * For it is the day of wrath; * the furnace shall burn, and the 
Judge shall sit and render to each ** the due reward for his works.  
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion from the Triodion:  
As I call to mind the hour of trial and the fearful coming * of the Master the 
Lover of mankind, * I am filled with trembling, and with sad countenance I cry 
unto Thee: * O most righteous Judge, Who alone art plenteous in mercy, ** by 
the intercessions of the Theotokos accept me who repent.  
On the Praises, 5 Resurrection Stichera, in the Tone of the week: 
And 4 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone II:  
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
I contemplate that day and hour * when we shall all stand naked, like men 
condemned and unclean, before the Judge. * Then shall the trumpet sound and 
the foundations of the earth shall quake, * the dead shall arise from the tombs * 
and all shall be gathered together from every generation. * Then the secrets of all 
shall be made manifest before Thee: * From those who never repented, there 
shall heard be weeping and lamentation, * as they depart to the outer fire; * but 
with gladness and rejoicing the company of the righteous ** shall enter into the 
heavenly bridal chamber.  
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of 
all Thy wonders.  
How shall it be in that hour on that fearful day, * when the Judge shall sit 
on His dread throne! * The books shall be opened and men’s deeds examined, * 
and those secrets of darkness shall be made public. * Angels shall hasten to and 
fro, gathering all the nations. * Come ye and hearken, kings and princes, slaves 
and free, * sinners and righteous, rich and poor: * for the Judge cometh to pass 
judgment on the whole world. * And who shall bear to stand before His face in 
the presence of the angels * as they call us to give account for our deeds and our 
thoughts, whether by night or by day? * How shall it be then in that hour! * But 
before the end draweth nigh, make haste, O my soul, and cry: ** O God Who 
alone art compassionate, turn me back and save me.  
Verse: I will be glad and rejoice in Thee, * I will sing to Thy name, O 
Most High.  
In Tone VIII: Daniel the prophet, * a man greatly beloved, when he saw the 
power of God, cried aloud: * “The court sat in judgment, and the books were 
opened.” * Consider well, my soul: dost thou fast? * Then despise not thy 
neighbor. * Dost thou abstain from food? * Condemn not thy brother, lest thou 
be sent away into the fire, there to burn as wax. ** But may Christ lead thee 
without stumbling into His Kingdom.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end.  
In Tone I: Let us cleanse ourselves, brethren, * with the Queen of the 
virtues: * for behold, she cometh, bringing unto us a wealth of blessings. * She 
quelleth the uprising of the passions, * and reconcileth those that have sinned to 
the Master. * Therefore let us welcome her with gladness, and cry aloud to Christ 
our God: * O Thou Who didst rise from the dead, ** keep us uncondemned as 
we render glory unto Thee, Who alone art sinless.  
Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Let us cleanse ourselves, brethren, * with the Queen of the virtues: * for 
behold, she cometh, bringing unto us a wealth of blessings. * She quelleth the 
uprising of the passions, * and reconcileth those that have sinned to the Master. 
* Therefore let us welcome her with gladness, and cry aloud to Christ our God: * 
O Thou Who didst rise from the dead, ** keep us uncondemned as we render 
glory unto Thee, Who alone art sinless.  
Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Most Blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him Who 
became incarnate of thee is Hades led captive, * Adam recalled, the curse 
annulled, Eve set free, death slain, * and we are given life. Wherefore, we cry 
aloud in praise: * Blessed art Thou, O Christ God, * Who hast been thus well-
pleased, glory to Thee.  
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Before 1st Hour: Glory ..., Both now ..., Gospel Sticheron for the week. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes: 6 in the Tone of the week, and 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon from the Triodion: 
At Thy fearful coming, O Christ, when Thou shall appear from heaven and 
set up the thrones, and the books shall be opened, then spare, O Savior, spare 
Thy creature.  
Since God is the Judge, nothing can help thee there, no zeal, no skill, no 
glory, no friendship, but only the strength that thou hast gained, O my soul, from 
thy works.  
Glory ..., I sing the praises of the Triune Godhead, the Father, Son and 
divine Spirit, one sovereign Principle divided in three Hypostases.  
Both now ..., Thou art the gate through which God alone hath passed, 
entering in and coming out, yet not breaking the seal of thy virginity O pure one: 
Jesus, the Creator of Adam, and thy Son.  
Order of Troparia & Kontakia for a temple dedicated to a Saint:  
Troparion of the Resurrection  
Troparion of the Temple  
Glory ..., Kontakion of the Temple  
Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone I:  
Both now ..., When Thou comest, O God, upon the earth with glory, * the 
whole world will tremble. * The river of fire will flow before Thy judgment seat, 
* the books shall be opened and secrets revealed. * Deliver me then, from the 
unquenchable fire, ** and count me worthy to stand on Thy right hand, O Judge 
most righteous.  
Prokeimenon from the Triodion, in Tone III: Great is our Lord, and 
great is His strength; * and of His understanding there is no measure.  
Verse: Praise ye the Lord, for a psalm is a good thing: let praise be 
sweet unto our God.  
1ST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS: (I COR 8:8-9:2) 
Brethren: Meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are we 
the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse. But take heed lest by any 
means this liberty of yours become a stumbling-block to them that are weak. For 
if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall 
not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things 
which are offered to idols; And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother 
perish, for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so against the brethren, and 
wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. Wherefore, if meat make my 

--- PAGE 19 ---
brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my 
brother to offend. Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus 
Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord? If I be not an apostle unto 
others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the 
Lord. 
Alleluia from the Triodion, in Tone VIII:  
Verse: Come, let us rejoice in the Lord. Let us shout with jubilation 
unto God our Savior. 
Verse: Let us come before His countenance with thanksgiving, and with 
Psalms let us shout in jubilation unto Him. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (25:31-46)  
The Lord said: When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the 
holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before 
him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as 
a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his 
right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his 
right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I 
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, 
and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came 
unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee 
an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a 
stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee 
sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto 
them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of 
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say also unto them on 
the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye 
clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also 
answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, 
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he 
answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of 
the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into everlasting 
punishment: but the righteous into life eternal. 
Communion Verse: Praise ye the name of the Lord in the heavens, 
praise him in the highest:  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet 
for the upright. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
VESPERS ON SUNDAY EVENING  
(There is no chanting of the Psalter) 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera are chanted as usual: 3 in the Tone 
of the week from the Oktoechos, and 3 for the saint of the day from the 
Menaion.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion. 
There is no Entrance, unless prescribed in the Menaion. 
Then, “О Joyous Light ...,” the Prokeimenon in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, bless ye the Lord, * all ye servants of the 
Lord. 
Verse: Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house 
of our God. 
Vouchsafe, О Lord ..., Litany: Let us complete ..., 
We omit the Aposticha in the Oktoechos, and chant the following in their place: 
On the Aposticha, in Tone VIII: 
Having endured the first nakedness through greed, * we were overcome by 
the bitter taste thereof, * and became exiles from God. * But let us return to 
repentance * and by fasting, purify our senses, which war against us. * And 
having thereby strengthened our hearts with the hope of grace, * and not with 
foods which are of no benefit, * let us partake of the Lamb of God, * Who, on 
the holy and radiant night of His Resurrection, * having offered Himself for our 
sake, * and communed with the disciples, at the mystical supper, * dispersed the 
darkness of ignorance ** by the Light of His Resurrection. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her Mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us. 
Repeat: Having endured the first nakedness ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, О Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
To the Martyrs: O martyrs of the Lord, * ye sanctify every place and heal 
every manner of infirmities: * and now we entreat you to intercede on our behalf 
** that our souls may be delivered from the snares of the enemy. 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion in Tone VIII: 
Those in heaven hymn thee, * O joyously blessed Mother unwedded, * and 
we glorify thine inscrutable birthgiving, O Theotokos; ** pray that our souls be 
saved!  
Then, “Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., Troparia. Litany: Have mercy on us ..., and Dismissal. 
 
After this Sunday, no more meat is eaten until the Sunday of the 
Resurrection: but during the week before Lent there is otherwise no 
fasting, so that eggs, cheese, butter, milk and ﬁsh are permitted on each 
day, including Wednesday and Friday. 
 
