--- PAGE 1 ---
WEDNESDAY IN CHEESFARE WEEK 
AT MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 10th Kathisma, 
the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (11th Kathisma), the Sessional 
Hymns: 
In Tone II: 
In peace and with humility * let us with devotion pass through the days of 
preparatory cleansing for the Fast. * In Thine ineffable love for mankind, O 
Christ God, * destroy the wicked schemes of the enemy * and by Thy Cross 
save us all, ** for Thou alone knowest the secrets of the heart. 
Glory ..., The foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Stavrotheotokion: Standing beside Thy Cross, * she who gave birth to thee 
without seed * could not endure seeing Thee unjustly suffering, * and cried 
aloud to Thee, * weeping and lamenting: * “O my sweetest son, how dost Thou 
suffer, * though Thou art dispassionate by nature? ** I sing the praises of Thine 
extreme loving-kindness. 
The Canons 
Note: (Ware et. al.) We chant 6 Troparia (including the Irmos) from the 
canon of the Cross in the Tone of the week, from the Oktoechos; 4 
Troparia from the canon, from the Menaion; and then the canon of the 
Triodion with 4 Troparia. But at ODES III, VIII, and IX we omit the 
canons from the Oktoechos and the Menaion, and we chant 6 Troparia 
(including the Irmos) from the canon of the Triodion, and then 8 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Troparia from the two three-canticled canons, with the Irmos of the 
second three-canticled canon is sung as Katavasia.  
In other traditions, the three ODES omitted from the canon in the 
Menaion are included as follows. At ODE I, 4 Troparia (including the 
Irmos) from the canon in the Oktoechos; 6 Troparia from ODES I and 
III from the canon in the Menaion; and then the canon of the Triodion 
with 4 Troparia. We do likewise at ODES VI and VII; at ODE VI we 
chant ODES VI and VIII of the canon in the Menaion, and at ODE VII 
we chant ODES VII and IX of the canon in Menaion. 
ODE I 
First canon, by Andrew of Crete in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I will sing unto Thee, O Lord my God, * for Thou hast led Thy 
people out of the bondage of Egypt, * and hast drowned in the waters * 
the chariots and the might of Pharaoh. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Fasting as man, according to our image, the Lord gained victory over the 
tempter; showing us by example the limits of fasting. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Through abstinence, Moses was deemed worthy to speak with God face to 
face on Sinai. O ye faithful imitate him. 
Glory ..., Be merciful, O Lord, unto Thy people; look upon them as God 
with a compassionate eye and visit them all with thine abundant mercy. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: To thee do we all flee, O Theotokos, for thou art 
our sure defender, and we ask that, by thine intercessions, thy flock may be 
delivered from all dangers. 
ODE III 
First canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: My heart hath been firmly established * in the Lord my God: * for 
by Him the weak * have been girded with strength. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Through abstinence, wonderful Enoch was translated from the earth: 
emulating his example, let us be translated from corruption to life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
By prayer and fasting let us beseech the Redeemer, for the Maker doth 
rejoice over the repentance of the works of His hands. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Make ready, O my soul, and cleanse thyself in preparation for the Passion of 
the Lord, that thou mayest noetically celebrate His Resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Since thou hast given birth to God, ever intercede on our 
behalf: for unto thee, O Theotokos, do we sinners flee for refuge. 
First three-canticled canon, by Joseph in Tone II: 
Irmos: On the rock of faith hast Thou established me, * and Thou hast 
emboldened my mouth against mine enemies. * For my spirit rejoiceth 
when I sing: * There is none as holy as our God * and none more 
righteous than Thee, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord.. 
Thou didst stretch out Thine arms upon the Cross, and by Thy death slay 
the curse, quickening mankind by Thy Passion. Wherefore we sing the praises 
of Thy divine Crucifixion, O Jesus our God and Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord.. 
Having died through eating from the tree, we have been quickened by the 
Tree of Thy Cross, which we offer unto Thee in prayer: Send down upon us 
Grace and mercy, O Master and Benefactor, Who art abundantly merciful. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The entranceway to the Fast hath been opened; the arena of abstinence 
approacheth. Let us rouse ourselves with fervent eagerness, that we may receive 
God’s gifts, and expunge the stain of transgression. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The blessed season of the Fast hath dawned and doth shine upon us with 
beams of repentance. Let us draw near with loving reverence, and rejoicing, let 
us cast off the darkness of sloth. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us wisely sanctify ourselves with the fast; let us proclaim the time of 
abstinence from the passions; and with tears let us cry aloud to the Master: 
Grant us grace, O Lord, that we may execute Thy will, O abundantly merciful 
One. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Accepting the Fast as a gift, given to us for our salvation, with all diligence 
let us observe it, that we may receive the forgiveness of our sins from the 
Hands of Him who hath fashioned us. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Assuage the tumult of my passions, and heal the wounds of my 
soul, and by thy mediation and protection, rouse me from the sleep of slothful 
indifference, O most holy Lady, Mother and Virgin.  
Second three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
When Thou wast willingly lifted up upon the Cross, O Savior, all the earth 
was shaken and the veil of the Temple was rent in twain. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou wast wounded upon the Cross, for my sake O my Jesus, and Thy side 
pierced O Good One, wherefore with faith I worship Thy divine power. 
Glory ..., Bowing down to the earth, I worship the Father, I glorify the Son, 
and I praise the Spirit: singular in will, yet three in Hypostases. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Unfathomable is the mystery of thy childbearing, 
O Holy Virgin Mary, for without knowing a man thou didst give birth to God, 
and yet remained inviolate. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, Glory to Thee. 
Do Thou sanctify the season of the Fast by Thy power, O Christ; and from 
the snares of the enemy save all who worship Thee. 
Katavasia: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit, * but do Thou 
show me to be fruitful * in Thy compassion O God, * Thou husbandman 
of all good things. 
Note: Sessional Hymn from the Menaion; Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Stavrotheotokion from the Menaion. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: I have heard report of Thee, O Lord * and I am afraid. * Having 
understood Thy works, * I am in awe of Thee O Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Abraham, by virtue of his hospitality, received the Trinity in the guise of 
angels.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The gift of abstinence cannot be stolen, and he who is wealthy by it will be 
made prosperous by the Godhead. 
Glory ..., Come, let us both lament, and cry aloud with faith: O God, cleanse 
us, for we have sinned greatly. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O blessed immaculate Mother, pure and 
undefiled Virgin, pray for the world to thy Son and our God. 
ODE V 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast caused the light to shine, * who hast made 
bright the dawn and revealed the day; * glory be to Thee, glory be to 
Thee, * O Jesus Thou Son of God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Moses, of old fasted on Mount Sinai, and became the God-seer; and Elijah 
was borne aloft in a chariot of fire. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Once, Isaiah the wise fasted, and tasted the coal of fire, when he touched his 
lips with it. 
Glory ..., Having fasted beforehand, Daniel, together with the three 
Children, broke the teeth of lions and trampled underfoot the burning flames. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O pure Birthgiver of God, who, remaining 
inviolate didst carry God within thy Womb, protect thy flock and keep it safe 
from harm. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: As Thou didst deliver Jonah the prophet from the Whale, * do 
Thou deliver me O Christ God, * and bring me out from the depths of 
mine offences * and save me, for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Honorable fasting once preserved Jonah in the Whale: let us therefore fast 
with all our heart, and flee the destruction of Gehenna. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The people of Nineveh turned God from His Wrath by their fervent 
repentance and sorrow. With such sorrow and yearning let us all follow their 
example. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., The Fast calleth us to repentance: let us run the race with love, 
comprehending what a gift abstinence is. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: In a manner beyond expression thou didst give 
birth to the Savior of the world, Christ our God; cease not to entreat Him that 
all who hymn thee may be saved. 
Katavasia: As Thou didst deliver Jonah the prophet from the Whale, * do 
Thou deliver me O Christ God, * and bring me out from the depths of 
mine offences * and save me, for Thou alone lovest mankind. 
Note: Kontakion from the Menaion; if there is no appointed Kontakion, 
Sessional Hymn of the Martyrs in the Tone of the week. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: O God of our fathers, put us not to shame, * but grant that with 
boldness we may sing to Thee: * “O God of our fathers, Blessed art 
Thou.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us become like Daniel, who through fasting tamed the lions in their den.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us with fear imitate the three Children, that we may escape the fire of 
Gehenna, as they did the furnace in Babylon.  
Glory ..., Let us fast with a pure heart; and cleanse our body, that we may 
consecrate our whole spirit entirely to God. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O pure Virgin Mother, from thee the pre-eternal 
Word took flesh: cease not to pray to Him, that our souls may be saved. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Those who confessed Christ the King, * the Children prisoners, in 
the furnace * cried with a loud voice, saying: * O all ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Having fasted previously, Joseph fled from intercourse with the sinful 
woman and was rewarded with royal power. Let us also quench with fasting, the 
fiery darts of Beelzebub the enemy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
By fasting, David gained victory over the Philistine and obtained the 
kingdom. Let us also then, gain victory over our enemies, that we may be 
crowned by the Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us preserve these virtues: the fortitude of Job, the perseverance of 
Jacob, the faith of Abraham, the chastity of Joseph and the courage of David. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Christ the King, didst thou bear O Virgin Mary, remaining a virgin after 
childbirth, O pure one: O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord. 
First three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: God Who descended into the ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Upon the mountain Moses raised his arms in the form of a Cross and 
gained victory over the enemy; and Thou, O Savior, stretching out Thine arms 
upon the Cross, didst put to death the all-destructive tyranny of Hades. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou wast nailed to the Cross and Thy side pierced, O Christ my Savior; 
Thereby delivering from the curse those born on earth, showing them to be 
sharers in Thine unending joy. Wherefore we bless Thee O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The season of abstinence hath noetically dawned, illumining the senses of 
the soul, and driving away the darkness of the passions. Let us, then, embrace it 
with our whole heart, supremely exalting Christ throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The passions that destroy the soul and the pleasures that bring death, are 
slain by fasting, for it ever setteth aright the impulses and movements of the 
heart. Let us then with faith, eagerly embrace it. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us the faithful sincerely honor the present holy day, acknowledging it, 
not as the beginning of the Fast itself, but as the entry and forecourt preceding 
the Fast. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
The most beneficial Fast welcomes beforehand the God-loving soul, 
enabling it to undertake soul-cleansing endeavors, as on the rungs of a ladder, 
wherefore the struggles of the present day have been included. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Open unto us, who knock and call upon thy mercy, for thou 
art the speedy refuge of all mankind and our firm helper in all things, the sure 
protection of those in need. 
Second three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Lifted up upon the Cross, O Master of all, Thou didst call back Adam and 
Eve, leading them, O Christ Savior, into Paradise once more; wherefore they 
sing Thy praises throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
When Thou wast willingly lifted up upon the Cross, O Christ, the rays of the 
sun were darkened in fear, and the day became as night; wherefore the thief 
confessed Thee to be God throughout all ages. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
We believe and confess that the Son and Holy Spirit are equal to the Father; 
and with faith we worship the Holy Trinity in one Godhead, ever trampling 
underfoot the teaching of Arius. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: How can I sing thy praises as is meet, O Virgin 
Theotokos? for I am darkened by the filth of sin, do thou forgive, O most-holy 
One, the boldness of my impoverished song. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O Cross, the hope of the faithful, the weapon of kings, the glory of priests, 
the strength of monks, by thy might save all those who ever hymn thee 
throughout the ages. 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord... 
Katavasia: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * 
unto Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless 
and supremely exult throughout all ages. 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat). 
ODE IX 
Irmos: We all magnify Thy love for mankind, O Christ our Savior. * Thou 
art the glory of Thy servants and the crown of the faithful, * who magnify 
the memory of her who gave birth to Thee. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Moses parted the sea in Egypt and led the people through it, and he fed 
them in the un-trodden wilderness, performing great miracles through fasting. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Through abstinence Joshua the son of Nun sanctified the people, leading 
them across the Jordan into the promised land. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
With only three hundred men who drank with cupped hands, Gideon 
overcame the Midianites, by abstinence and prayer. Let us imitate his example.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice!, all-precious pure One, the glory of virginity, the 
strength of the angels, the helper of all, joy of the world, Mary, Mother and 
Handmaiden of our God. 
First three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: God the Word, God of God ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Stretching out Thy divine arms upon the Cross, Thou didst join together 
that which was formerly divided, O Redeemer: and by Thy mediation Thou hast 
brought unto the Father, as a gift, the condemned nature of mortal man, 
wherefore we hymn Thy most pure Crucifixion. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The holy Fast hath shone upon with the cleansing rays of grace, purifying 
the streams of our thoughts, and driving away darkness from our noetic eyes. 
Let us then, O ye faithful, eagerly embrace it. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The harbinger of light, the Fast, hath drawn forth for us a cup filled with 
divine gifts, which have been revealed unto us this day. If we wish to share in 
them for the benefit our soul, let us beseech the Master of all that He aid us in 
this. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
With the nails that pierced Thy divine hands, O compassionate One, Thou 
didst affix our sins to the Cross. With the spear that wounded Thy side Thou 
didst tear to pieces the record of our bitter transgressions, wherefore we hymn 
Thy most pure Crucifixion.  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The path of exceedingly good virtues hath opened unto us, the arena of the 
Fast hath been readied for us: Striving lawfully, let us beseech Christ to grant us 
from on high a peaceful Lenten season.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: By thy quick intercession, and thy bold protection, through thy 
powerful help, O pure Lady, do thou preserve thy faithful servants from all the 
wiles of the enemy, saving them from passions, transgressions, and all dangers. 
Second three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: In a manner surpassing nature ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Willingly Crucified upon the Cross, Thou hast delivered us from the curse 
of the law. Wherefore, as is right, we magnify Thee, O Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
All mankind worships Thy sufferings, O Savior, which Thou didst willingly 
accept, that the race of mankind may be delivered from bondage to the enemy. 
Glory ..., The eternal Father hath begotten the Son and the Spirit is of the 
same Essence as the Father and the Son, an undivided Trinity. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Grant forgiveness of sins unto us sinners, O 
most blessed Mary, by thine intercessions before the Savior who assumed flesh 
from thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Unto us who venerate thee, and by Thy power O Cross, grant peaceful 
passage through the season of the Fast, delivering us from bondage to the 
enemy. 
Katavasia: In a manner surpassing nature, * the Word who timelessly 
shone forth from the Father, * hath been conceived within a womb, * 
according to the flesh, * O ye faithful with never silent hymns let us 
magnify Him. 
The Exapostilarion in the Tone of the week; Glory ..., the Exapostilarion 
from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone I: 
If thou dost fast from food, O my soul, * but dost not cleanse thyself from 
passions, * in vain dost thou rejoice over thine abstinence. * For if thou seekest 
not amendment, * thou shalt be as hateful to God as the liar, * resembling the 
wicked spirits, who eat not at all. * Render not the fast worthless by sinning, * 
but firmly resist all wicked impulses. * Picture thyself standing beside the 

--- PAGE 11 ---
crucified Savior, * or rather, thyself crucified with Him who was crucified for 
thee; * and cry out to Him: ** Remember me, O Lord, when Thou comest in 
Thy Kingdom 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: If thou dost fast from food ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone I: 
O all-famed martyrs, * neither tribulation nor distress nor hunger nor 
persecution, * neither peril nor the fury of wild beasts * nor the sword, nor the 
threat of fire, * could separate you from God. * But out of love for Him, * as 
though your bodies were someone else’s, * ye forgot nature and despised death. 
* Wherefore, for the sake of your sufferings ye have received your due reward, * 
and become inheritors of the heavenly Kingdom. ** pray ye on behalf of our 
souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone I: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon beholding the Lamb * lifted up upon the Cross, * 
the immaculate Virgin cried aloud, weeping: * “O my Child most sweet, * what 
is this new and all-glorious sight? * How is it that Thou Who holdest all things 
in Thy hand ** hast been nailed to the Tree in the flesh?”  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
 
Then the reader immediately beginneth the first hour. At the First Hour we 
read the Lenten verses, Hearken in the morning to my voice..., without 
chanting and without prostrations; and so it is with the Lenten verses at the 
other Hours. The Prayer of St Ephraim is said at the Hours, with the usual 
number of bows and prostrations. There are no readings from the Psalter 
during the Hours.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone III: 
O holy and almighty King, * before whom all creation doth stand in fear 
and trembling, * save us: for Thou canst forgive our sins ** in that Thou art 
good and compassionate. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., The forgoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Save O Lord, Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I cried, O Lord my God 
 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF JOEL (2: 12 - 26) 
Thus saith the Lord: turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, 
and with weeping, and with mourning: And rend your heart, and not your 
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, 
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil. Who 
knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a 
meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord your God? Blow the trumpet 
in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly: Gather the people, sanctify the 
congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the 
breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her 
closet. Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and 
the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage 
to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say 
among the people, Where is their God? Then will the Lord be jealous for his 
land, and pity his people. Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people, 
Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied 
therewith: and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen: But I 
will remove far off from you the northern army, and will drive him into a land 
barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part 
toward the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour shall come 
up, because he hath done great things. Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for 
the Lord will do great things. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the 
pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree 
and the vine do yield their strength. Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and 
rejoice in the Lord your God: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, 
and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter 
rain in the first month. And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the vats shall 

--- PAGE 14 ---
overflow with wine and oil. And I will restore to you the years that the locust 
hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpillar, and the palmerworm, my great 
army which I sent among you. And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and 
praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: 
and my people shall never be ashamed. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord will give strength unto His people: * the Lord 
will bless His people with peace. 
Verse: Ascribe unto the Lord, ye sons of God, ascribe unto the Lord 
glory and honor. 
 
Note (Ware et. al.): The Prokeimenon before the lesson from the Old 
Testament is read as follows: When the Troparion of the prophecy has 
been sung the second time, the priest saith: Let us attend. The reader 
does not say “Prokeimenon”, but says immediately: in Tone six: Save O 
Lord, Thy people ..., 
After the Prokeimenon the priest saith: Wisdom, The reader: The 
reading is from the Prophecy of Joel. Priest: Wisdom: Reader: Thus saith 
the Lord..., and the rest of the Old Testament Lesson. After the end of 
the lesson, the priest saith: Let us attend. Reader: in Tone seven: The 
Lord Will give strength..., And so we do throughout Lent on weekdays 
when the Old Testament lessons are read at the Sixth Hour or at 
Vespers. 
The Typika are read today after the Ninth Hour.  
We begin with Psalms 102 and 145, followed by “O only-begotten Son 
and Word of God ...,” Then the Beatitudes, read quickly, without 
chanting, and the rest of the Typika, with the Prayer of St Ephraim, as in 
Lent. 
 After the Prayer of St Ephraim, the reader at once beginneth Vespers, 
saying: “O come, let us Worship ...,” and then the Psalm of introduction.  
 
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
WEDNESDAY IN CHEESFARE WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the usual Stichera.  
Then: “O Joyous Light ...”:  
Prokeimenon of the day, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
A READING FROM THE PROPHECY OF JOEL (3:12 - 21) 
Thus saith the Lord: Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley 
of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Put ye 
in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the 
fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley 
of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. The sun 
and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. The 
Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the 
heavens and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, 
and the strength of the children of Israel. So shall ye know that I am the Lord 
your God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, 
and there shall no strangers pass through her any more. And it shall come to 
pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills 
shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a 
fountain shall come forth out of the house of the Lord, and shall water the 
valley of Shittim. Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate 
wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have 
shed innocent blood in their land. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem 
from generation to generation. For I will cleanse their blood that I have not 
cleansed: for the Lord dwelleth in Zion. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Let Israel hope in the Lord, * from henceforth and for 
evermore. 
Verse: Lord, my heart is not exalted, nor are mine eyes lofty. 
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”: Litany: Let us complete ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone III: 

--- PAGE 16 ---
The springtime of the Fast hath dawned, * the flower of repentance hath 
buddeth forth. * O brethren, let us cleanse ourselves from all impurity * and 
chant unto the Giver of Light, saying: ** Glory be to Thee who alone lovest 
mankind. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: The springtime of the Fast hath dawned ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, * strengthened by faith and hope, * united in soul by 
the love of Thy Cross, * destroyed the tyranny of the enemy; * and, having 
received crowns of glory, ** they intercede together with the bodiless hosts, on 
behalf of our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
First in holiness among the saints, * the praise of the heavenly hosts, * the 
hymn of the apostles, * the cause and reason of the prophets, ** O Sovereign 
Lady, do thou accept our prayers. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. The Troparion of the 
Saint of the day, Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion: 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: (Once only) 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible 
Kingdom, and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a 
sinner; make steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine 

--- PAGE 17 ---
every defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: 
One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore (Thrice). 
PSALM 33 (read or sung) 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom: 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Choir: Father (master) bless! 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our true God, always, Now and ever, 
and unto the ages of ages 
Choir: Amen. Establish O God, the Holy Orthodox faith, and Orthodox 
Christians, unto the ages of ages 
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir: More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, thee who without corruption gavest birth to 
God the word, the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee  
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen, Lord, have mercy. (Thrice), father 
(master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
Note: On this day, and on Friday in the week before Lent, there is no 
celebration of the Liturgy; neither of the full Liturgy nor of the Liturgy 
of the Presanctified Gifts. On Wednesday evening we chant Small 
Compline. 
 
