--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY IN CHEESEFARE WEEK 
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion from the Menaion (Twice); 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion for Thursday in the same Tone. After 
the 1st chanting of the Psalter (13th Kathisma), the Sessional Hymns of 
repentance in the Tone of the week from the Oktoechos. After the 2nd 
chanting of the Psalter (14th Kathisma), the following Sessional Hymns: 
 In Tone V: 
The forty days and the week of cleansing that proceedeth them * are today 
embraced by all the apostles, * whereby they sanctify this season of fasting * 
which they themselves received from Christ the Redeemer, * proclaiming His 
Resurrection unto all ** and interceding with the Lord that our souls find 
mercy. 
Glory ..., the forgoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
Those who have a steadfast hope in thee, O pure Virgin, * find protection 
and deliverance from a multitude of temptations, * dangers, and wicked 
circumstances. * Do thou intercede together with the apostles, * before thy Son, 
** and save all those who sing thy praises. 
The Canons 
Note: We chant the two canons from the Oktoechos, and the canon 
from the Menaion in the normal way. However, when the three-canticled 
canons from the Triodion are appointed, we omit both the canons from 
the Oktoechos; and we chant 6 Troparia (including the Irmos) from the 
canon of the Menaion and then 8 Troparia from the three-canticled 
canons. We also chant as Katavasia, the Irmos of the 3rd canon, (2nd 
canon from the Triodion). 
ODE IV 
First three-canticled canon, by Joseph in Tone IV: 
Irmos: The prophet heard of Thy coming ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Thy disciples shone forth throughout the world with the light of the 
knowledge of God, overcoming and destroying the darkness of delusion. By 
their prayers O compassionate One, save those who sing Thy praises. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
The entranceway to the Fast hath been crowned with the fruits of ascetic 
endeavors, welcoming those who draw near in sobriety, who, with hymns and 
mystical songs, make haste, O ye faithful, to enter therein. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Taking up garments of death, by yielding to sensual desires, I have clothed 
myself in wretchedness. But do Thou clothe me, O Son of God, with the 
radiant garment of renewal. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I have passed my life in wickedness and all uncleanness; but unto Thee, O 
All-merciful One, do I flee for refuge. Do Thou come quickly, and save me, O 
Christ God, through Thy compassionate goodness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Beyond speech didst thou conceive, and in a supra-natural 
manner didst thou bear, O Birthgiver of God, Him who doth reign over 
creation, and before whom we beseech thee to intercede without ceasing, that 
He deliver from every peril, those who call thee blessed. 
Second three-canticled canon, by Theodore in Tone II: 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
With the radiance of your teaching, O apostles, ye have dispersed the 
darkness of self-indulgence; through your abstinence ye have enlightened all 
mankind, both sinners and the righteous, wherefore ye are praised by all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Like unto radiant pearls of the Word, O apostles, through your abstinence 
ye have adorned all the ends of the earth, ever restoring our souls to their true 
nobility. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Ye have cooled the raging furnace of the passions with the dew of fasting, O 
apostles, teaching all mankind to keep that which cannot be stolen, a dwelling-
place of holiness. 
Glory ..., I have sinned more than all, and unrepentant like Manasses, I have 
transgressed. O Lord, teach me the ways of repentance, before death doth take 
me. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: In thee have the faithful found a haven of 
salvation and an invincible rampart, O Theotokos: for by thine intercessions, O 
Lady, thou dost free our souls from danger.  
Katavasia: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * 
nor as an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save 
me, the whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord! 
ODE VIII 
First three-canticled canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: In wisdom hast Thou fashioned all things ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The whole earth is full of Thy praise, O Lord. For the godly preaching of 
Thy divine disciples hath been heard in every place, turning the world from the 
depths of ignorance to knowledge, as it hymneth Thee: Bless ye the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The divine grace of repentance hath been made manifest, conferring 
salvation and victory upon those who take pleasure therein, by the sweat and 
pain of their ascetic endeavors. Hasten then to the master, O my soul, and seek 
forgiveness for the multitude of thy sins. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The arena of God-given abstinence hath been opened unto us: let us who 
are in need of mercy gladly enter therein. In His tender compassion God 
thirsteth for our salvation, and He longeth to grant forgiveness to those who 
sincerely seek Him, and serve Him with love. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
With fasting watch thy mouth, have peace in thy heart, and serve the Lord, 
O my soul, with the good works of virtue, offering them to Him as a sweet-
smelling sacrifice, crying aloud: O all ye Works, without ceasing bless ye the 
Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O thou who reignest over all, accept the prayers of thy 
servants, O Lady Theotokos, and deliver me from the unquenchable flames of 
darkness, and cleanse me from the multitude of my evil deeds, by thy mediation 
and divine intercession. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Second three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: The relentless fire, fed with endless fuel ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
As effulgent lights Christ hath given you to all the ends of the earth, O 
apostles, saying: Go ye and teach the nations, that seeing me as One in the flesh 
who lived in abstinence, and thereby trampled underfoot all the strength of the 
enemy; that the straight path may be revealed to them. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou hast shown, O Christ, how abstinence leadeth mankind to cleansing 
and deliverance from passions. For through it Thine apostles pleased Thee, 
becoming shining lights upon the earth; preaching to all The Lord in three 
Hypostases, single in Essence, hymning Thy praises. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Ye were sent by Christ your Teacher, O disciples, as heralds to the gentile 
nations, to enlighten their thoughts with divine teachings, encouraging them to 
abstain from an excess of food and passions, and to desire abstinence, and 
thereby learn that He is the Lord, Creator, and Benefactor of all. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Like Cain, the murderer of old, I have not brought before Thee an 
unblemished offering O Christ; held fast by unclean thoughts. Reject me not, as 
I draw near to Thee through fasting O most beneficent Savior; but look 
favorably upon the gifts that I bring to Thee with love, O my God, during this 
season of the Fast.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Blessed is the womb of the Mother of God, for 
it hath received the Word, assuming the form of a man from her, He united to 
His Hypostasis flesh, whereby she was revealed as the City of God in which the 
Lord Most High was pleased to dwell. To her We cry aloud: Rejoice, O pure 
Theotokos, full of grace! 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord... 
Katavasia: The relentless fire, fed with endless fuel, * drew back in fear 
before the pious Children, * pure in body and in soul; * and as the flame 
waned in strength, * they sang an everlasting song: * O all ye works, 
praise ye the Lord * and exalt Him above all throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
First three-canticled canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
As inextinguishable flames ye were sent forth into the World, delivering 
mankind from the depths of sin, wherefore with joy we sing in praise of Christ, 
who gave you the strength to be His apostles. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O Wise ones, Christ sent you out as salt into a world that had lost its savor. 
Bringing it back to the knowledge of God, wherefore we praise you in faith. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I am beset by a multitude of grievous sins: in tears I fall down before Thee, 
O Christ, asking Thee to grant me forgiveness, in the good season of the Fast. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Bound fast by the chains of my passions, I groan and cry aloud to Thee, O 
Savior: free me, that with great joy I may sing in praise of Thy loving-kindness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: God hath appointed thee, O pure Virgin, to help the race of 
mankind: cease not to diligently intercede before Him on behalf of us the 
faithful. 
Second three-canticled canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Thou didst contain within thy Womb ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The choir of the apostles shone forth with divine radiance upon the whole 
of the inhabited earth, enlightening the world.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O Jesus, Lover of mankind, the choir of Thy disciples hath taught the 
nations of the gentiles to treasure the riches of abstinence. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
As a twelve-stringed harp, the company of Thy disciples brought the riches 
of abstinence and the wellspring of salvation to mankind. 
Glory ..., With the voice of the Prodigal I cry to Thee, O Lord: I have 
sinned, Father; save me and be compassionate, reject me not from Thy glory. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: In thy womb thou didst bear God as a man, 
gushing forth the fountain of life throughout all the world, wherefore we sing 
thy praises, O all-holy Virgin. 
Katavasia: Thou didst contain within thy Womb * the God whom 
nothing can contain, * and hast brought forth joy to the world, * 
wherefore we sing thy praises, * O Virgin Theotokos. 
 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone III: 
The solemnity of the Fast hath illumined us, * expelling the darkness of 
wicked spirits. * The time of abstinence hath come, * bearing with it healing for 
the passions of our soul. * By it, Daniel of old shut the mouths of the lions, * 
and the Children in Babylon quenched the flames in the furnace. * By it save us 
also with them, * O Christ God, ** since Thou lovest mankind. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: The solemnity of the Fast hath shone upon us ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone III: 
Even after death ye shine as lights in the world O holy martyrs, * ye who 
have fought the good fight: * since ye have great boldness, ** pray to Christ that 
He be merciful to our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Holy art thou among women, O Theotokos, * Mother unwedded: * pray to 
the King and Son Whom thou didst bear, ** that He save us in that He is the 
Lover of mankind. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
THURSDAY IN CHEESEFARE WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” the usual Stichera are sung.  
Then “O Joyous Light ...”:  
Prokeimenon of the day, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: My help cometh from the Lord, * Who hath made heaven 
and the earth 
Verse: I have lifted up mine eyes to the Mountains, from whence cometh 
my help 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone II: 
For those who steadfastly venerate the Cross of Christ, * it is a bridle 
restraining all manner of sensuality, * and a law of abstinence. * For, ever 
looking upon Him who was crucified thereon, * they crucify the flesh with its 
passions and lusts. * Let us also flee from such things; * fasting in purity, that 
we become one with Him, * who out of love for mankind * hath made Himself 
one with us by suffering the Passion, * enabling us to share in His own 
passionlessness; ** for He hath great mercy 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: For those who steadfastly venerate the Cross of Christ ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone II: 
Having no desire for earthly pleasure, * O ye passion-bearers, * ye were 
granted heavenly blessings, * and became fellow-citizens with the angels. ** By 
their prayers, O Lord, have mercy on us and save us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Stavrotheotokion: When thou didst behold, O pure Virgin, * the 
unblemished Vine, * whom thou didst conceive within thy womb, * hanging 
upon the Tree, * lamenting, thou didst cry aloud: * O Child, Thou sweetness 
which doth drive away the drunkenness of the passions, * O Benefactor, grant 
this for the sake of me who hath given birth to Thee, * by Thy divine 
comforting, ** since Thou art Compassionate. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  

--- PAGE 8 ---
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord have mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 9 ---
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Holy God, Holy Mighty ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ...,  
Lord have mercy (12 Times) 
.Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee  
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen, Lord, have mercy (Thrice), father 
(master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
Note: We say Great Compline, with prostrations, as on Tuesday. At the 
Midnight Office we say the Prayer of St Ephraim with prostrations, as in 
Lent. 
 
