--- PAGE 1 ---
SATURDAY IN CHEESEFARE WEEK 
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * 
Take not Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our 
life in peace. (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (16th
 Kathisma), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone VIII: 
Illumined by the brilliant lightning of the Fathers, * let us now enter as if 
into a beautiful Paradise, * and delight beside the river of sweetness therein. * 
Beholding with wonder their valor, * let us strive to equal them in the virtues, * 
crying aloud unto the Savior: * O God, by their intercessions ** make us 
partakers of Thy heavenly Kingdom. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Let us with one accord praise the first of monastics Paul, Anthony the Wise 
and Euthymios, * with all the other desert Fathers. * Let us entreat them to 
unceasingly intercede with Christ on our behalf, * as we celebrate their divine 
and most radiant memory, ** and glorify in hymns the Savior and Lord. 
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
We ever thank and magnify thee, O most pure Theotokos, * and bowing 
down, we hymn thy birthgiving and unceasingly cry aloud, * O thou who art full 
of grace: do thou Save us, * O all-merciful Virgin, * in that thou art good, do 
thou snatch us from the demons * at the hour of trial, and the dread sentence, 
** that we, thy servants, may not be put to shame.  
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (17th
 Kathisma), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone IV: 
Antony and Euthymios, * along with all the other God-bearing Fathers * let 
us praise with hymns, * and let us celebrate their solemn memory, * for they 
intercede before the Lord on behalf of all the world, * that we may be redeemed 
from the ancient curse ** and delivered from torment. 
Glory ..., in Tone IV: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Wandering as it were among the flowers of the virtues * in the meadow of 
God-bearing ascetics, * we are filled with the breath of sweet fragrance. * For 
by suffering they became hardened against temptations, * and by abstinence 
they subjected the flesh to the spirit, * living the life of angels here on earth; ** 
wherefore they have been deemed worthy of glory. 
 Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
By the prayers of Thy bodiless ones, O Christ, * and the Forerunner, * of 
the disciples, prophets and martyrs, * of all Thy saints and venerable ones, * and 
of Thy blessed Mother, * we beseech Thee; grant us to walk in Thy light, * and 
grant us to receive Thy Kingdom ** for the sake of Thy compassionate mercy. 
Then Psalm 50:  
The Canons 
Note: We chant the canon of the patron saint of the church or 
monastery with 6 Troparia (including the Irmos) and the canon of the 
fathers with 8 Troparia, in Tone VIII: 
ODE I 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a melody ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us all with one accord praise in spiritual hymns our divine Fathers, who 
were glorified for their ascetic life in Egypt, the Thebaid and Libya, and in every 
place and city and land. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Rejoice, most-glorious Anthony the first-leader of monastics; and the God-
bearing Ammoun, the glory of Nitria; and Arsenios the angel, endued with the 
gift of silence; and Ammonas, the bearer of the Spirit. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Be radiant ye true vessels of God, Agathon, sanctified in soul, Achilles and 
Ammon, the flowers of the desert; Anoub and Alonios, Amonathas and 
Anthimos, shining pearls of virtue. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us sing today in praise of the lamps of discernment: Aris and Apollos 
the Great; and the bright torches of obedience: Athry and Akakios, and with 
them Avakyrus, who also shineth like the morning star. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Auxentios was a mountain of an elevated way of life; Abramios the Great 
excelled in purity; Aphrodisios and Athenodoros were pillars of abstinence.  
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Ammonios shone forth among ascetics like a star in heaven, along with the 
divine Aninas; and Antiochos the Great and Agapitos the renowned, who also 
shone forth with them. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us praise with sacred hymns the great Athanasios who practiced 
asceticism on Mount Athos, becoming a shining beacon to the whole inhabited 
earth; and by whose prayers we all are saved. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Through your God inspired lives, ye have become in very truth a Paradise 
of the Church, O wise and blessed Fathers. Ever intercede before the Lord for 
each of us by name. 
Refrain: Holy martyrs pray to God for us. 
Come, ye faithful who love the martyrs, let us honor them with our hymns, 
chanting and crying aloud with faith to Christ our God: “Let us sing to Thee, 
our only Master.” 
Glory ..., I sing the praises of three Hypostases one in Essence, the Father 
unbegotten, the Son begotten and the Holy Spirit: A Kingdom and sovereignty 
without beginning, a single Godhead. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice, most holy Temple, Fleece upon which 
the dew of God descended, the sealed Fountain of the waters of immortality. 
Preserve thy city O Lady, safe from the multiplicity of the attacks of the enemy. 
Katavasia: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous 
God * Who hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory 
* and crying aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
ODE II 
Canon of the fathers: 
Irmos: See now, see that I am your God, * begotten of the Father before 
all ages, * conceived without a man in these latter times from the Virgin, 
* abolishing the sin of the forefather Adam, * as the Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
We are filled now with a sweet fragrance, as if entering another Paradise 
divinely-planted with the virtues of the holy ascetics, which, by their abstinence 

--- PAGE 4 ---
and tears, have blossomed forth, offering to God as fruit, the diversity of their 
ascetic ways of life. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
The great Bessarion who lived as do the birds like an angel; a second Job 
was Benjamin in his fortitude; Vitaly, the shining light who saved the harlots for 
God. With them, let us also hymn the divine Vitymios and the glorious Vavylos. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
By thy holy way of life O Benedict, thou didst become a citizen of heaven. 
A dwelling-place of wisdom was Vasianos the shepherd; and Basil received a 
crown for obedience, dwelling within a tomb while yet alive, thereby revealing 
to us the glory of obedience. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us offer a hymn to Gelasios, the ever-memorable master of the passions. 
Let us praise Gerasimos, for whom the wild beasts toiled, coming to him 
because of the perfection of his virtues. Glory be to our father Germanos and 
to Gaios the wise servants of Christ. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
David, the praise and glory of Thessalonica, and God-pleasing Daniel, let us 
praise. Daniel of Scetis, great in miracles in word and deed; Dios and Dalmatos, 
true leaders of monastics and pillars of the faith. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
More brightly than the stars, the Godly-wise Dometianos and Dometios 
shine upon us like two beacons. With them let us also praise and glorify all 
those whose names are unknown. 
Refrain: Holy martyrs pray to God for us. 
An inexhaustible source of rich blessings for the faithful are the tombs of 
the martyrs, who suffered for the sake of the Lord. Come O ye faithful, let us 
reverence them with hymns, and receive healing for our souls and bodies. 
Glory ..., A most perfect Unity, supreme in Holiness in three Hypostases, 
the Father unbegotten, the Son only-begotten, the Spirit proceeding from the 
Father and made manifest through the Son: single in Essence and in Nature, 
one Lordship and one Kingdom, save us all.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou alone hast given birth to a Child in a 
manner strange to mankind; thou alone wast not subject to the corruption that 
cometh from nature, for without seed thou didst undergo childbirth without 

--- PAGE 5 ---
corruption. Wherefore, as is meet, O pure One, we the faithful glorify thee as 
the Theotokos. 
Katavasia: See now, see that I am your God, * begotten of the Father 
before all ages, * conceived without a man in these latter times from the 
Virgin, * abolishing the sin of the forefather Adam, * as the Lover of 
mankind. 
ODE III 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: There is none as holy as the Lord ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us enter another Paradise, that of the virtues of the Holy Fathers. Let us 
taste of the ever-giving and quickening fruits of delight therein, and with faith 
let us sing their praises. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us honor Euthymios, the brightest of stars, and Elladios, the Daystar, 
with the Godly inspired Ephraim, and the exceptional Eulogios. By their works 
and wonders they have shone forth unto the ends of the earth. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let the wondrous Zosimas be praised in song, as well as the all-honored 
Zachariah, Zeno and Zoilos; and let us also honor with them Isaiah the Great 
and Elijah the glorious. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
I hymn the holy Theodore of Therme, and the all-hymned Theodore of 
Ennaton, with them I also praise Theodoulos and Theonas; and I honor the 
glorious Theodosios the Great. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Praise be to Theoktistos, the righteous and proper shepherd, to the exalted 
Thalassios, to the great Theodore of Sykeon, who with signs and wonders was 
exalted upon the earth. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Shining like bright stars, John the Short, John of the Ladder, and the many 
other saints named John, who shone forth gloriously. 
Refrain: Holy martyrs pray to God for us. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Let us who love to celebrate feasts, honor with hymns and spiritual odes the 
annual memory of the holy martyrs: for they ever intercede with Christ on 
behalf of our race. 
Glory ..., Consubstantial Trinity, a Unity supreme in Godhead, yet distinct in 
Hypostases and single in Nature, do Thou unite us as being of one will by Thy 
commandments. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Tabernacle formed by God, Moses depicted 
thee prophetically in writing, as the Holy of Holies overshadowed by the 
seraphim, O Virgin, thus prefiguring thy pure childbirth by which Christ hath 
become incarnate. 
Katavasia: There is none as holy as the Lord, * and none as righteous as 
our God, * Whom the whole of creation hymns: * There is none more 
righteous than Thee, O Lord. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
As bright rays of the Sun of righteousness, * Christ sent you to illumine the 
whole inhabited earth O holy teachers: * wherefore, by your holy prayers, 
enlighten the gloomy darkness of my soul * with the divine light of the 
knowledge of God, ** O ye blessed ones of God. 
Another Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
To the gentleness and purity of Antony, * the great wonders of Euthymios, 
* the solitude and stillness of Paul and Arsenios, * the fame of Theoktistos, and 
that of all the other holy monastics, * let us together, O ye faithful glorify and 
offer praise, *and with them also, the virgin Eupraxia * and all the Godly-wise 
women, * and let us cry aloud with one accord: * Pray ye all to Christ God, * 
that those who celebrate your holy memory with love ** may receive the 
forgiveness of their sins. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Having broken asunder the bonds of the passions, * with compelling desire 
you pursued goodness, * and clothing yourselves in Christ, ye have obtained 
rest through your labors, * and with the toils of abstinence, * ye have attained to 
the heavenly life. * Wherefore, as it meet, ye rejoice together with the powers on 
high. * O God-bearing Fathers, * pray ye that those who celebrate with love 
your holy memory ** may be granted the remission of their sins. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Mired in the depths of sin, * there is no strength left in me; * the tempest of 
my trespasses hath engulfed me. * But since thou hast given birth to the Word, 
the only Lover of mankind, * look upon me thy servant, I entreat thee, * and 

--- PAGE 7 ---
deliver me from sin and the soul-corrupting passions, * and from every ill 
inflicted by the deceiver, O Sovereign Lady, * that I may sing with joy: * Pray to 
Christ God on behalf of me thy servant, * that I may be granted the remission 
of sins; ** for I have set my hope in thee. 
ODE IV 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: From the overshadowed mountain ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
A lamp seen throughout the world, was the divine Hilarion; the great Justin 
by his knowledge of God, was like a mountain; and let us also praise Hierax and 
Ivestion, great in honor, together with Joseph. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
And Jeremiah whose life was radiant; Isebyrion who showed mighty spiritual 
strength; and with them Karion, Koprios, Kastor and Cassian who shone forth 
in exceeding righteousness. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
I admire Kallistos, of blessed speech; I praise the good works of Laurence; 
and the noble deeds of Longinos do I extol; I also honor the virtues of Lot. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
I hymn Leontius, the depth of Theology; I sing of Maximos, the spacious 
sea of dogmatic teaching; and of the most approved Markianos; and of Mark 
the obedient, who hearkened unto God. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Makarios the Great was honored for his virtues, Makarios of Alexandria was 
a man of renowned piety. Praised also in their company is Mark the virtuous, 
and with Dalmatius, Moses the Ethiopian. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
I magnify Martinian and Malhoes, who undertook great struggles for the 
sake of purity; I honor Markellos the abbot, and Millis who raised the dead. 
Refrain: Holy martyrs pray to God for us. 
O ye martyrs of Christ, ever offer to the Maker and Creator prayers for 
peace in the world, and for all who honor your memory with hymns. 
Glory ..., Strange it is that the Godhead is One and Three, fully present in 
each single Person without division: for the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit 
are worshipped as one God. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice! spacious dwelling-place of God; Rejoice! 
ark of the New Covenant; Rejoice! vessel from which the heavenly Manna hath 
been given to all mankind. 
Katavasia: From the overshadowed mountain, * from the only 
Theotokos, * the Prophet in divine vision * foresaw Thy coming in the 
flesh, O Word, * and with fear he glorified Thy power. 
ODE V 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: Deliver me, I pray Thee ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Come, and in the Eden of Paradise let us look upon the ever-living flowers 
of the struggles and victories of the Fathers, which are tended by the Lord 
alone. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
The souls of all are noetically watered and refreshed by the streams of the 
words of Nilos and illumined by the lives of Navkratios, Nikon with Nathaniel; 
and beatified by Nitheron. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Xenophon and his sons enlighten us with the bright radiance of their 
virtues, as doth the great Orsesios and above all Onuphrios; and who among 
mortals can worthily praise Poemen? 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
We bless Pambo, exalted both in action and in word, as deserving of our 
praise. Let us honor the famous Publius, who conquered the demons, and with 
him let us also glorify the renowned Pinnuphrios. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Meet it is to honor the most glorified Paphnutios, as also Pior, Patermuthios 
and Paul the Simple, and Pitirim the Great, eminent among the Fathers. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us radiantly glorify Pachomios, the star outshining all others; and let us 
sing in praise of Palamon, and his companions in the ascetic life, the godlike 
Petronios and Passarion. 
Glory ..., Three Hypostases, but one in Nature, is the God in whose Name 
we were baptized and in whom we believe: the Father, the Word and the 
consubstantial Spirit. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: By a word, thou didst bear the Word in a manner 
transcending description O most pure One. We entreat thee, never cease to 
pray to Him that thy flock may always be delivered from danger. 
Katavasia: Deliver me, I pray Thee, * from the dark night of the passions, 
* and grant my spirit, to seek Thee * at the dawning of the morning, * 
guided by the light of Thy commandments, O Christ. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: Held fast by a multitude of sins ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Wondrous are our most venerable Fathers, as are their divine struggles, their 
spiritual wrestling, and their works of healing. Who but they have performed 
such miracles?  
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us praise Rabbula the wonderful, and also Rufus, Sisoes equal to the 
angels, and with them divine Seridos and Silvanus.  
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
As a four-starred firmament, the four Simeons were revealed on earth: three 
of them were stylites and one a fool for Christ. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Shining as the sun among the stars, the leader of monastics - Savvas the 
Sanctified; and next to him shineth Serapion, together with Silvanus. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Sarmatas and Timothy, Tithois also, with Hyperechios, Pharmuthios, 
Phokas, Chariton, Chairemon and Psois let us hymn, and also Or the wise. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
May the holy and glorious multitude of the Fathers, those whom we have 
remembered and those whose names are not known, deliver from danger all 
who with love celebrate their memorial. 
Glory ..., Unto Thee, the Trinity without beginning, the divine Unity; Light 
and Lights, do I hymn, the Life and Lives: Mind, Word and Spirit, the one God. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Leap for joy O forefather Jesse, for from thy 
root hath blossomed forth the Flower of Life that doth save the world: Christ 
God, born from the pure Maiden. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Katavasia: Held fast by a multitude of sins O Lover of mankind, * like 
the Prophet I fall down before Thy tender compassions. * Accept me O 
Lord and save me. 
Kontakion of the holy fathers, in Tone VIII: 
As preachers of piety, putting ungodliness to shame, * Thou hast glorified 
the company of the God-bearing Fathers * making them shine upon all 
throughout the world. * By their prayers, protect all who praise and magnify 
Thee, ** that they may sing to Thee O Lord: Alleluia. 
Ikos: I looked upon the pleasures of this life and I considered the nature of 
what I beheld; and, measuring the toil and suffering they cause, I judged the life 
of mortal man to be one of misery. Ye alone do I call blessed, having made the 
better choice: to desire Christ and to remain with Him, and to ever sing with the 
prophet David: Alleluia. 
SYNAXARION READING 
Verse: To the souls of the Righteous, whose memory abideth forever, do 
I offer these my words as abiding oblations.  
Verse: Having led us gently through the preceding Feasts, the God-
bearing 
On this day, we commemorate all the Saints, both men and women, who 
shone forth in asceticism. The Fathers have prepared us for the arena of the 
Fast and led us away from luxury and satiety. They have instructed us with fear 
of the future Judgment, and have skillfully cleansed us by anticipation during 
Cheesefare week, having placed two fast days in the middle of the preceding 
week, in order gradually to rouse us to fasting. Behold, they now set in our 
midst those who lived lives of sanctity, through their many labors and toils, 
both men and women, so that, by reminding us of their struggles, they might 
make us more vigorous for the contest, and so that, having their lives as an 
example and guide, and eliciting their alliance and aid, we might disrobe for 
spiritual exertions, taking it into account that they shared in the same nature as 
ourselves. For, just as generals, when their armies are arrayed and are already 
standing in line, stir up their own troops by recounting examples and memories 
of men of old who fought with distinction and valor, and the troops, stimulated 
thereby with the hope of victory, set out wholeheartedly for combat, so also do 
the God-bearing Fathers wisely act in our case. Encouraging both men and 
women to spiritual contests through the example of those who have lived in 
holiness, in this way they bring them to the arena of the Fast, in order that, 

--- PAGE 11 ---
looking to their lives as an excellent prototype, we might attain to the many 
different kinds of virtue, as each of us is able: first, love, and then conscious 
abstinence from unseemly works and deeds, and fasting itself, that is, not just 
from food, but also from the sins of the tongue, anger, sins of the eyes, and, to 
put it simply, refraining from all that is evil. For this reason, the Holy Fathers 
appointed the present commemoration of all the Ascetic Saints, adducing those 
who were well-pleasing to God for fasting and other good works, urging us to 
proceed, in their image, to the arena of the virtues, and exhorting us to arm 
ourselves valiantly against the passions and the demons, reckoning that if we 
show zeal equal to theirs, there is no impediment to our achieving all that they 
achieved and being deemed worthy of the same rewards; for, they shared in the 
same nature as ourselves. 
By the intercessions of all Thine ascetic saints,  
O Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the Children in the furnace ..., 
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Come, and as is meet, let us offer hymns to the women that lived the ascetic 
life, equal to that of the angels, and let us cry: By their intercessions, O God, 
save us all. 
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Let us faithfully honor Christ-bearing Vryaini, with the divine Fevronia, 
Thomais, Hiereia, Platonis and Melanthia. 
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Let us praise the Evpraxias, angelic in mind, and also the two Theodoras; 
and let unceasing hymns and glory be given to the all-blessed Anastasias who 
served God in a marvelous manner. 
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Mary of Egypt was a light to the world, as was Mary who was named 
Marinos shining like a star on the earth; Euphrosynia radiant as the sun in her 
virtues. 
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Theodouli was a flame of fire in her life; and with her Theodoti, Julitta and 
blessed Isidora, shone forth in fasting. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Let us honor Marina, of heavenly-wise mind, and the great Matrona; and let 
us also praise the wisdom of Synklitiki, Sarah and Justa.  
Refrain: Venerable mothers pray to God for us. 
Pelagia, the angel of the Lord, and Taisia, the lamp of repentance, with all 
the other women who shone forth in the ascetic life, Let us praise in hymns. 
Glory ..., With one accord we worship and glorify the Father, the Son and 
the Holy Spirit, and cry aloud with faith: Glory to Thee, O Trinity in Unity, our 
God. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O blessed Virgin Theotokos, who didst give 
birth to the Savior and Master of the world, entreat Him at all times that our 
souls find mercy. 
Katavasia: Thou didst bedew the Children in the furnace, * and Thou 
didst preserve Thy Mother as a Virgin after childbirth: * Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Pastors and wise teachers, the hierarchs of the Church of Christ, together 
with the holy monks, let us all hymn, and let us praise the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let the praise due Basil the Great be granted him, and also to the much 
suffering Athanasios, together with Gregory who surpassed all men in theology. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
To John of the Golden Mouth, as to the two Cyrils, the pillars of divine 
wisdom let us give glory, and also to Hesychios the other Theologian, with the 
divine Meletios who discoursed concerning God. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let glory be given to Gregory of Nyssa with the two Fathers named 
Wonderworkers; and throughout the ages let us praise Epiphanios, wise in the 
things pertaining to God, and Amphilochios, the shining star. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Let us sing of Metrophanes, the glory of priests, with Nektarios, Attikos, 
Gennadios and Anatolios, the lamps of life; and let us also honor wise Eusebios 
and Proklos.  
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
I sing of Nicolas the holy preacher and Sophronios truly sweet as honey in 
speech, and of Eulalios and Diadochos, together with Eustathios and Juvenaly, 
chief among the Fathers. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
As a Unity in Essence I sing to Thee; as the Trinity in Hypostases I honor 
Thee, the Father, the Son and the Most holy Spirit. The beginningless power of 
Thy Kingdom do I glorify throughout the ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou hast been revealed as the 
Mountain of God upon which Christ hath come to dwell; and He hath made 
divine temples of those who sing: Praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord... 
Katavasia: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the 
mystery of the Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning 
bush: * praise ye and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Canon of the temple, then that of the fathers: 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver ..., 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Who can speak of the boldness of Ambrose? Who can describe the wisdom 
of Hierotheos, and the steadfastness with which the two Alexanders struggled 
for the faith? 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us sing in praise of the divine Phaidimos and the God-bearing Spyridon, 
Antipatros, Pambo, Palladios and Nonnos, with Jerome and the all-honored 
Germanos: for they are like shining lights of the Divinity. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us honor Dionysios, great in the knowledge of God, initiate of the 
heavenly mysteries, and the much-suffering Clement, with Flavian and Paul the 
Great, the first heralds of the faith. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us hymn Michael of Synada and Tarasios, Nikephoros and the illustrious 
Theodore, with Theophanes and Jerome, defenders of the icons of Christ. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
Let us hymn Peter and Ignatios, who in very truth were God-bearers, as 
apostles of Christ who suffered for His sake, and also Polycarp and Cyprian the 
martyrs of Christ. 
Refrain: Venerable fathers pray to God for us. 
O holy fathers and hierarchs of the Lord, martyred priests and bishops, and 
venerable women saints, all those whom we have named and all those whose 
names are unknown: pray ye that our souls may be saved. 
Glory ..., O God, one in three, glory be to Thee without ceasing. For each is 
God, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, one in Nature, yet threefold and 
distinct in the splendor of their Hypostases. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The bush which burned with fire and yet was not 
consumed, which Moses saw of old upon Mount Sinai, foreshadowed thy 
womb, O Virgin, which received the incorrupt fire. 
Katavasia: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the 
fire of the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the 
salvation of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we 
magnify thee. 
The Exapostilarion in Tone III: 
Those who denied the world and took up the Cross, * the multitude of 
venerable Fathers, * together with the choirs of martyrs, * the company of 
hierarchs and holy women, * you all gladden us, * wherefore, as is meet, ** we 
sing the praises of your most radiant memory. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
O ye God-bearing Fathers, who shone forth in the ascetic life, * together 
with the hierarchs, martyrs and choirs of holy women: * We praise you with 
joyous hymns, that we also may be sanctified, * and by your prayers and the 
intercessions of the Theotokos, ** quietly complete the course of the Fast. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness.  
O ye faithful, let us all glorify the multitude of Fathers * who lived venerable 
ascetic lives, * and with Godly-wise hymns, O brethren, * let us with one accord 
praise the hierarchs of Christ: * for they lived their lives in abstinence and pure 

--- PAGE 15 ---
fasting, * elucidating for us the Gospel of Christ. * And with them let us also 
sing the praises of the holy and God-bearing women * let us strive to imitate 
their way of life, ** that we may receive the forgiveness of sins. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with psaltery 
and harp.  
Let us praise and render glory, O brethren, * to those who shone forth in 
the ascetic life, * for having lived well a venerable life, * they have been 
translated to eternal life in gladness. * To a blessed and unflagging rest, * having 
with virtue and holiness traversed the straight path. * Let us render them the 
honor due them, * that by their intercessions we may obtain mercy from God, * 
and eternal joy and glory, ** and that we may be delivered from future 
torments. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise Him with strings and 
flute.  
O choir of all hierarchs, * assembly of the righteous, * and of the ascetics 
and venerable women * who lived in piety, * intercede, we pray, with the Lord 
who alone is good and exceedingly good, * that He be compassionate unto us. * 
and deliver us from condemnation in the Age to come, * by your prayers, O 
wise ones, * may we rejoice eternally in the blessedness of heaven, ** crying 
aloud ceaselessly with hymns of praise to the Giver of Life. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord.  
Let us celebrate today a solemnity, * O ye faithful, * in memory of the 
plentitude of saints, * of the hierarchs and ascetics, * the martyrs, venerable 
women and the righteous. * For they despised all that is transient and subject to 
corruption, * looking upon it as but a spider’s web, as dung, * that they might 
gain Christ and His Kingdom, and its divine blessings * which eye hath not 
seen, nor ear ever heard. ** By their prayers, O God, deliver our souls from 
corruption. 
Glory ..., in Tone VI: 
O Holy Fathers, * the fame of your virtuous deeds hath gone forth 
throughout all the earth, * and in heaven ye have received the reward of your 
labors. * Having destroyed the host of demons * ye now dwell with the ranks of 
angels, * whose lives ye blamelessly emulated. * Since ye have boldness before 
the Lord, * pray on our behalf, * that our souls be granted peace. 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the 
Fruit of life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Sovereign Lady, with the holy 
apostles, ** that He have mercy upon our souls.  
Great Doxology, the Troparion in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * 
Take not Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our 
life in peace.  
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * and unknown to the ranks of Angels, * 
hath been revealed to those on earth through thee, O Theotokos: * God 
incarnate in an uncommingled union, * Who willingly accepted the Cross for 
our sake, * and through it hath raised up the first-formed man, ** and saved our 
souls from death. 
The Two Litanies, and the Dismissal. 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
SATURDAY IN CHEESEFARE WEEK 
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes we chant 4 Troparia from ODE III of the Canon of 
the fathers, and 4 Troparia from ODE VI. 
Let us enter another Paradise, that of the virtues of the Holy Fathers. Let us 
taste of the ever-giving and quickening fruits of delight therein, and with faith 
let us sing their praises. 
Let us honor Euthymios, the brightest of stars, and Elladios, the Daystar, 
with the Godly inspired Ephraim, and the exceptional Eulogios. By their works 
and wonders they have shone forth unto the ends of the earth. 
Let the wondrous Zosimas be praised in song, as well as the all-honored 
Zachariah, Zeno and Zoilos; and let us also honor with them Isaiah the Great 
and Elijah the glorious. 
I hymn the holy Theodore of Therme, and the all-hymned Theodore of 
Ennaton, with them I also praise Theodoulos and Theonas; and I honor the 
glorious Theodosios the Great. 
Wondrous are our most venerable Fathers, as are their divine struggles, their 
spiritual wrestling, and their works of healing. Who but they have performed 
such miracles?  
Let us praise Rabbula the wonderful, and also Rufus, Sisoes equal to the 
angels, and with them divine Seridos and Silvanus.  
Glory ..., Unto Thee, the Trinity without beginning, the divine Unity; Light 
and Lights, do I hymn, the Life and Lives: Mind, Word and Spirit, the one God. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Leap for joy O forefather Jesse, for from thy 
root hath blossomed forth the Flower of Life that saveth the world: Christ 
God, born from the pure maiden. 
Troparion, in Tone IV: 
O God of our fathers, * ever deal with us according to Thy meekness. * 
Take not Thy mercy from us, * but by the prayers of these saints ** direct our 
life in peace.  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
As preachers of piety, putting ungodliness to shame, * Thou hast glorified 
the company of the God-bearing Fathers * making them shine upon all 
throughout the world. * By their prayers, protect all who praise and magnify 
Thee, ** that they may sing to Thee O Lord: Alleluia. 
 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: The saints shall boast in glory: * they shall rejoice upon 
their beds. 
Verse: The high praise of God shall be in their throat, and two-edged 
swords shall be in their hands. 
 
(DAY) EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (14:19-23; 16:25-27) 
Brethren: Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and 
things wherewith one may edify another. For meat destroy not the work of 
God. All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with 
offence. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby 
thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. Hast thou faith? have it 
to thyself before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing 
which he alloweth. And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth 
not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Now to him that is of power to 
stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, 
according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the 
world began, But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, 
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all 
nations for the obedience of faith: To God only wise, be glory through Jesus 
Christ for ever. Amen. 
(FATHERS) EPISTLE TO THE GALAIANS (5:22-6:2) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, 
goodness, faith, Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. And they 
that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live 
in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, 
provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in 
a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; 
considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, 
and so fulfill the law of Christ. 
Alleluia in Tone II: 
Verse: They are planted in the house of the Lord: and shall flourish in 
the courts of our God. 
Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: it is fitting for the just to give 
praise. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
(DAY) GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (6:1-13) 
The Lord said: Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen 
of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. 
Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as 
the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory 
of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But when thou doest 
alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: That thine alms may 
be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee 
openly. And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they 
love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that 
they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But 
thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy 
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret 
shall reward thee openly. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the 
heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be 
not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have 
need of, before ye ask him. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father 
which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come, Thy will be 
done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us 
our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but 
deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for 
ever. Amen. 
(FATHERS) GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (11:27-30) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: All things are delivered unto me of my 
Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man 
the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come 
unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my 
yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall 
find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 
 
Communion verse: Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye 
righteous; praise is meet for the upright. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. 
