--- PAGE 1 ---
TRIODION 
FIRST WEEK OF LENT: TUESDAY MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once. Then followeth the 1st chanting 
of the Psalter (Kathisma X) and the Sessional Hymns from the 
Oktoechos
Sessional Hymn, by Joseph, in Tone II: 
 in the Tone of the week. Then followeth the 2nd chanting of 
the Psalter (Kathisma XI) and: 
The grace of the holy fast is most blessed: * for through fasting Moses was 
glorified, * receiving the law written upon tablets. * Through fasting the three 
children were made stronger than the flames! * Let us, then, quench the burning 
passions of the flesh. * Let us cry out to Christ the savior: ** “Grant us all 
conversion and deliver us from Gehenna!” 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
The season of repentance is at hand, * show the fruits of abstinence, O my 
soul! * Consider those who have repented in the past * and cry aloud to Christ: 
* I have sinned, O loving master; * save me, as Thou didst save the publican 
who sighed with sorrow from his heart, ** for Thou alone art plenteous in 
mercy! 
 Both now ..., in Tone II: 
O Theotokos, thou fervent intercessor of Christians, * ever entreat thy son, 
that He deliver us * from all the malice and cunning of the enemy, * and by 
thine intercessions, O Mother and Virgin, * that in His tender compassion * He 
grant us the forgiveness of our sins,  
 Then the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma XII) followed by: 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Sessional Hymn; by Theodore, in Tone V: 
As we begin the second day of saving abstinence, * we cry unto Thee, O 
Lord: * pierce our hearts with compunction * for we are Thy servants * and 
accept the prayers we offer unto Thee in fear. * Allow us to complete the 
course of the fast without stumbling, ** and grant us cleansing and great mercy! 
Glory ..., in Tone V: 
Repeat: As we begin the second day of saving abstinence ..., 
Both now ..., in Tone V: 
O root that hath budded forth the divine flower, tabernacle and candlestick, 
golden vessel of manna, holy table bearing the bread of life: with John the 
Forerunner, intercede before Him, since He is thy son and God, that He may 
grant mercy and salvation to all who acknowledge thee to be the very 
Theotokos! 
 Psalm 50, Then: “O God save thy people ...,” Lord have mercy (40 times): 
Followed by the canons from the Menaion and the Triodion: Consult the 
rubrics for the order of reading (Mother Mary’s Lenten Triodion). Note: 
After ODE III there is a small litany, followed by the Sessional Hymns 
from the Menaion: After ODE VI there is a small litany, followed by the 
Kontakion and Ikos from the Menaion and/or Triodion. 
The tri-ode canon, by Joseph, in Tone II: 
ODE II: FIRST CANON 
Irmos: Behold; behold! I am He who hath saved the people of Israel * in 
the sea and nourished them in the wilderness. * I drew water from a rock 
for mortal men, * that I might raise up the one who had fallen into 
corruption, * and draw him to me by Mine unspeakable mercy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my Soul, be temperate; be vigilant, sigh and weep. Reject all the burden of 
sin by fasting. Flee from the fire of the passions by true and fervent repentance, 
rend asunder the garments of mourning with thy tears, and be clothed anew. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
By fasting let us ascend the mountain of virtue, casting aside the creeping 
things of sensuality. Let us enter into the darkness of sacred contemplations, let 
us behold Christ our beloved one in His beauty, and through divine ascents 
mystically become godlike. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Woe is me! Who will I become? And what shall I do? Conscienceless, I have 
committed sins and not feared the Master. Therefore, even before the 
Judgment, I stand condemned. Save me and bring me back, O righteous and 
gracious Judge, though I have angered Thee more than all mankind. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
O unsown earth, which brought forth the Nourisher of all: He Who 
openeth His hands, and of His own good will, satisfieth every living thing by 
His power. Strengthen with the Living Bread hearts weakened by satiation with 
wicked transgression.  
Second canon, by Theodore, in Tone V: 
Irmos Behold now, and see that I am God * who hath willingly clothed 
Myself in flesh to save Adam, * who from the snares of the serpent * fell 
into transgression. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Come, let us gather in the chamber of our soul, rendering prayers unto the 
Lord and crying: “Our Father, Who art in heaven, forgive and remit our 
transgressions, since Thou alone art compassionate!” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Showing our souls to be joyful in the Fast, let us not grieve the loss of our 
days of pleasure, for this loss brings instruction in virtue. 
Glory ..., The Unity of three Hypostases, beginningless, uncreated Lord, 
King of all the ages, a multitude of angels and all mortal nature glorify Thee: 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit! 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Let us hymn the most virtuous glory of mankind, 
for in her we have been deified. Thou hast borne, for our sake, the God and 
Savior, Christ who hath released us from the curse. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Who quenched the flames? Who closed the mouths of beasts? It is the Fast, 
which delivered the youths from the fiery furnace, and Daniel the prophet from 
the teeth of the lions. So even now O brethren let us welcome it. 
Katavasia: Behold now, and see that I am God * who hath willingly 
clothed Myself in flesh to save Adam, * who from the snares of the 
serpent * fell into transgression. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
After ODE III there is a small litany, followed by the Sessional Hymns 
from the Menaion: After ODE VI there is a small litany, followed by the 
Kontakion and Ikos from the Menaion and/or the martyricon. 
ODE VIII  
First canon 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * unto 
Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless and 
supremely exult throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my Soul, put aside the wicked sleep of laziness, and persevere with sincere 
vigilance in the Lord’s commands. The torch-bearing Bridegroom draweth near; 
let us hasten to greet Him! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Wounded by wicked pleasures, heal me with the bountiful cure of Thy 
merciful divine will, O Word, and I will ever glorify Thee with thanksgiving. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Restrain thyself, O soul, from harmful passions, from hate, and envy, and 
from every evil, and be Thou nourished in the Fast with the spiritual manna 
from heaven, which is the Word of God. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
O Pure Birthgiver of God, heal the inclinations of my soul, the passions of 
my heart; and the instability of my mind. For thou alone art an invincible wall 
and the only help of us sinners. 
Second canon; 
Irmos: The Fashioner of all creation, * whom the angels fear: * let us 
praise, O ye people, * and supremely exalt throughout all ages! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Having raised our souls toward heaven through abstinence, let us offer 
acceptable prayers to the Lord.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Receiving the spirit of compunction, let us weep for the salvation of our 
souls, glorifying Christ throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
Trinity consubstantial, Unity uncreated, God of all: we exalt Thee 
throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 Both now ..., Pray for all those who magnify thee in song, O pure One, and 
deliver them from all temptations and dangers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Spitting out the food of the wealthy, come, let us fast with Lazarus, that we 
also may be comforted in the bosom of Abraham. 
Verse: We praise, we bless and we worship the Lord, hymning and 
supremely exalting Him throughout all ages! 
Katavasia: The Fashioner of all creation, * whom the angels fear: * let us 
praise, O ye people, * and supremely exalt throughout all ages! 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX:  
First canon 
Irmos: Who born on Earth hath ever heard of, or beheld, * a Virgin 
miraculously conceiving in her womb, * and painlessly giving birth to a 
child, * wherefore we magnify thee O pure Virgin. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Who among men hath sinned against the Lord as much as I have? Or who 
hath remained in sin for as long as I, O wretched man? But, do Thou O God, 
the Fountain of mercy, have compassion upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Angelic powers, ye who look upon God, entreat Him who is quick to 
forgive, to save the soul of one, lost and adrift on the sea of this life’s pleasures, 
in a tempest of passions, and suffering from the attacks of hostile spirits. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Come, soul, take wing, by the efforts of the fast arise from indolence. Be 
filled with the vision of joy, and behold God in faith!  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
Who can worthily proclaim thy praises, O pure Virgin, thou who hast given 
birth ineffably to the exalted Master and Lord, and to whom the angelic hosts 
sing praises. Pray to Him on behalf all of who have sinned exceedingly, O 
unwedded Bride. 
Second canon; 
Irmos: O Isaiah, Rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; 
* and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call 
blessed. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
This is the acceptable time. This is the time for repentance. Let us offer our 
virtues to God as gifts, and set aside the works of darkness, by putting on the 
armor of light as the apostle Paul proclaims. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As the Lord killed the enemy by fasting, so let us also come to destroy his 
arrows and spears, saying: Get thee behind me, Satan! when he cometh to tempt 
us. 
Glory ..., I hymn the Trinity in Unity: eternal, honorable, life-giving; 
indivisible, consubstantial. Unbegotten Father, begotten Word and Son, and 
Holy Spirit, save us who hymn Thee! 
 Both now ..., Thy fruit is above all understanding, O Mother of God, for in 
thee a conception took place without a man, and thy childbearing was virginal. 
God was born from thee, and we magnify and bless thee, O Virgin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Through fasting, let us look on God, as we approach the mount of prayer 
with a pure heart, and receive the tablet of His commandments as Moses did, 
shining spiritually with them in the presence of God’s love. 
Katavasia: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in 
her womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and 
man; * and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we 
call blessed. 
Then: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God. * More honorable than the 
Cherubim, * and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, * 
who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, * the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
The Small Litany 
The Exapostilarion for Tuesday in the Tone of the week. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone III : 
Let us begin the pure fast, O ye people, * which is the salvation of our souls. 
* Let us serve the Lord with fear; let us anoint our heads with the oil of good 
deeds. * Let us wash our faces with the waters of purity. * Let us not use empty 
phrases in prayer, but as we have been taught, let us cry aloud: * “Our Father 
who art in the heavens, ** forgive us our trespasses, since Thou lovest 
mankind!” 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Let us begin the pure fast ... 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
The warriors of Christ have rejected the fear of kings and tormentors, * and 
with boldness and courage confessed Him, our King, * the Lord and God of all, 
** and now they pray on behalf of our souls. 
Glory ...,  
Both now ..., 
O Theotokos, thou protection of all who pray to thee, * we have boldness 
and exult in thee. * We put all our hope in thee. * Pray for thy corrupt servants, 
** to the one whom thou didst bear. 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ...,  
Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
FIRST WEEK OF LENT, TUESDAY 
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone I : 
We are strangers upon the earth, * as all our forefathers were; * the span of 
our life is brief. * But O our savior, keep us free from sin, ** and have mercy on 
us in Thy love for mankind! 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Attend unto the voice of my supplication * O my King, 
and my God. 
Verse: Unto my words give ear O Lord; hear my cry! 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (1:19-2:3) 
The Lord said: If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: 
But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth 
of the Lord hath spoken it. How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full 
of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Thy silver is 
become dross, thy wine mixed with water: Thy princes are rebellious, and 
companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they 
judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. 
Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will 
ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies: And I will turn 
my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin: 
And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the 
beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the faithful 
city. Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with 
righteousness. And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall 
be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. 29 For they shall 
be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for 
the gardens that ye have chosen. For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, 
and as a garden that hath no water. And the strong shall be as tow, and the 
maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench 
them. The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and 
Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the 
LORD’s house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be 
exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall 
go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the 
house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in 

--- PAGE 10 ---
his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, * nor chasten me in 
Thy wrath. 
Verse: Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
FIRST WEEK OF LENT, TUESDAY  
VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, by St. Joseph, in Tone II: 
As of old we were cast out from paradise through eating bitter food, * let us 
make haste to enter therein again, * abstaining from the passions, and crying to 
our God: * “Thou didst stretch out Thy hands upon the cross, * Thou didst 
drink vinegar and tasted of gall, * patiently enduring the pain of the nails: * Do 
Thou uproot all bitter pleasures from our souls, ** and for the sake of Thy 
tender compassion save Thou Thy servants.” 
Once we were cast out of paradise through eating from the tree, * but 
through Thy cross we are restored again. * We offer unto Thee Thy cross in 
supplication, * O Lord of many mercies, praying to Thee in faith: * send down 
upon us fountains of tears in this time of abstinence * to cleanse the filth of our 
passions and offenses, * that we may cry fervently to Thee: ** “Glory to Thee 
O Lord!” 
As once Thou didst grant paradise to Adam, * so now grant me O Word the 
joy of abstinence, * that I may taste of all Thy commandments, O God, * yet 
never eat of the forbidden fruit of sin; * and so with gladness ** I shall come to 
Thy life-giving passion on the cross! 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., from the Menaion.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord my god, in Thee have I put my hope, * save me! 
Verse: Save me from them that persecute me, and do Thou deliver me! 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (1:14-23) 
The Lord said: Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide 
the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, 
and years: And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give 
light upon the earth: and it was so. And God made two great lights; the greater 
light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. 
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, 
And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the 
darkness: and God saw that it was good. And the evening and the morning were 
the fourth day. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the 

--- PAGE 12 ---
moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open 
firmament of heaven. And God created great whales, and every living creature 
that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and 
every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good. And God 
blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, 
and let fowl multiply in the earth. And the evening and the morning were the 
fifth day.. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord, our Lord, * how wonderful is Thy name in all the 
earth!  
Verse: Thy magnificence is lifted high above the heavens! 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (1:20-33) 
Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets: She crieth in 
the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she 
uttereth her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? 
and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you 
at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my 
words unto you. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my 
hand, and no man regarded; But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and 
would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when 
your fear cometh; When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction 
cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall 
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall 
not find me: For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the 
Lord: They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof. Therefore 
shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. 
For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools 
shall destroy them. But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall 
be quiet from fear of evil. 
Litany: Let us complete ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VIII: 
Let us keep the fast not only by refraining from food, * but by becoming 
strangers to all bodily passions; * that we who are enslaved to the tyranny of the 
flesh may be deemed worthy * to partake of the Lamb, the Son of God, * slain 
of His own will for the sake of the world, * and that we may spiritually celebrate 
the feast of the Savior’s resurrection from the dead! * So shall we be raised on 
high in the glory of the virtues, * through our righteous actions ** giving joy to 
the Lord and the Lover of mankind! 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us.  
Repeat: Let us keep the fast ... 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, putting aside the things of this life, * and enduring 
tortures for the sake of the life to come, * were shown to be its inheritors, * and 
now they rejoice with the angels! ** By their prayers grant Thy people great 
mercy! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: “O marvelous wonder! O Strange mystery and fearful 
deed!” * Cried the Virgin as she beheld in fear and trembling, * Thee, the child 
whom she had borne without travail, * hanging between two malefactors on the 
cross. * She cried aloud weeping: * “Woe is me, O my beloved child! How hast 
this wicked and ungrateful people ** nailed Thee to the Cross!” 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Holy God, Holy Mighty ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ...,  
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
Reader: O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible 
Kingdom, and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a 
sinner; make steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine 
every defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: 
One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore (Thrice). Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
PSALM 33 (READ OR SUNG) 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
GREAT COMPLINE 
CANON OF ST. ANDREW OF CRETE 
TUESDAY OF THE FIRST WEEK 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: Amen. Glory to Thee our God ..., Heavenly King ..., Holy God ..., 
Our Father.  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Reader: Lord Have Mercy (12 times)..., Glory ..., Both now ..., O come let us 
worship ..., Then:  
Psalm 69 
O God, be attentive unto helping me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Let 
them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned 
back and brought to shame that desire evils against me. Let them be turned 
back straightway in shame that say unto me: Well done! Well done! Let them be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all that seek after Thee, O God, and let them that love 
Thy salvation say continually: The Lord be magnified. But as for me, I am poor 
and needy; O God, come unto mine aid. My helper and my deliverer art Thou, 
O Lord; make no long tarrying.  
Immediately there follows the second stasis of the great canon in Tone VI : 
ODE I 
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My 
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him 
* for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
By mine own free choice I have incurred the guilt of Cain’s murder. I have 
killed my conscience, bringing the flesh to life and making war upon the soul by 
my wicked actions. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Jesus, I have not been like Abel in His righteousness. I have never offered 
Thee acceptable gifts or godly actions, a pure sacrifice, or an unblemished life.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O wretched soul, Like Cain, we have also offered to the Creator of all, 
defiled actions, a polluted sacrifice and a worthless life: wherefore also we are 
condemned. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast fashioned me, O my Maker and Redeemer and Judge, as one who 
moulds clay, giving me flesh and bones, breath and life. But do Thou accept me 
in repentance. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Savior, I confess to Thee, the sins I have committed, the wounds of my 
soul and body, which murderous thoughts, like thieves, have inflicted upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Though I have sinned, O Savior, yet I know that Thou lovest mankind. 
Thou dost chastise with mercy and art fervently compassionate. Thou seest me 
weeping and dost hasten to meet me, like the Father calling back the Prodigal 
Son. 
Glory ..., O Trinity beyond all essence and worshiped in unity, take from me 
the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me tears of 
compunction. 
 Both now ..., O Theotokos, thou hope and protection of those who sing 
unto Thee, take from me the heavy yoke of sin and O Lady, as one pure, accept 
me in penitence. 
ODE II 
Irmos: Attend O heaven and I shall speak, * and sing in praise of Christ, 
* who from the virgin took flesh and came to dwell among us. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Sin hath stripped me of the robe that God once wove for me, and it hath 
sewn for me garments of skin.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am clothed with the raiment of shame as with the leaves of the fig tree, in 
condemnation of my self-willed passions. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am clad in a defiled garment, shamefully bloodstained by the flow of a 
passionate and self-indulgent life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have fallen under the burden of passions and the corruption of material 
things; and the enemy vexeth me.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have lived a life of love for material things, lacking in abstinence, instead 
of one free from possessions, O Savior, and now I wear a heavy yoke. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have adorned the image of my flesh with a many-colored coat of shameful 
thoughts, wherefore I am condemned.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Having cared only for outward adornment, I have neglected that which is 
within; the tabernacle fashioned in God’s image.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have buried with the passions the first beauty of the image, O Savior. But 
seek me, as once Thou didst seek the lost coin, and find me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like the Harlot I cry to Thee: I have sinned, I alone have sinned against 
Thee. Do Thou accept my tears as sweet myrrh, O Savior. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like the Publican I cry to Thee: Be merciful, O Savior, be merciful to me. 
For no child of Adam hath ever sinned against Thee as I have sinned. 
Glory ..., O God of all, I sing of Thee as one in three hypostases, Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., O most holy virgin Theotokos, who alone art praised 
everywhere, pray thou fervently that we may be saved. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my 
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Unto me Thou art the Fountain of life, and the Destroyer of death; and 
before the end I cry unto Thee from my heart: I have sinned, do Thou cleanse 
and save me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned against Thee, do Thou cleanse me. For 
there is none among men who have sinned, whom I have not surpassed in 
transgressions.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have followed the example, O Savior, of those who, in the days of Noah, 
lived in wantonness; and like them I am condemned to drown in the Flood. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou, O my soul, hast followed after Ham, who mocked his father. Thou 
hast not covered thy neighbor’s shame, by walking away with turned face. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Flee, O my soul, like Lot from the burning of sin; flee from Sodom and 
Gomorrah; flee from the flame of every unspeakable desire. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Have mercy, O Lord, have mercy on me, I cry unto Thee, who comest with 
Thine angels to give to every man what is due for his deeds.  
Glory ..., O simple Unity praised in a Trinity of Hypostases, uncreated 
beginningless Essence, save us who in faith worship Thy power. 
 Both now ..., O Birthgiver of God, who without knowing a man hast given 
birth within time to a Son, who was begotten outside time from the Father; and, 
strange wonder! thou givest suck while remaining a Virgin.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. 
* How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * 
and he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to 
Thy power, O Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, be watchful, be full of courage, like unto the great Patriarch, that 
thou mayest acquire action with knowledge, and be named Israel, “the mind 
that sees God”; and thus by contemplation reach the innermost darkness and 
gain great merchandise.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The great Patriarch begat the twelve Patriarchs as children, mystically 
establishing for thee, O my soul, a ladder of ascent through action, for in his 
wisdom he set his children as steps, by which thou canst ascend upwards. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast emulated Esau the despised, O my soul, and given the birthright 
of thy first beauty to the deceiver; thereby losing thy father’s blessing, and in thy 
wretchedness thou hast been twice deceived, both in action and in knowledge, 
wherefore repent now. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Esau was called Edom because of his raging love for women; burning 
always with unrestrained desire and stained with the smear of sensual pleasure, 
he was named “Edom”, which means the red-hot heat of a soul that loveth sin.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, of Job who was justified, but thou hast not 
imitated his fortitude. In all thine experiences, and trials, and temptations, thou 
hast not kept firmly to thy purpose but hast shown thyself to be inconsistent. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
He formerly sat upon a throne, but now he sitteth upon a dung-hill, naked 
and covered with lesions. Once he was blessed with many children and admired 
by all, but suddenly he became childless, and homeless. Even so, he counted the 
dung-hill as a palace and his sores as pearls 
Glory ..., Undivided in Essence, uncommingled in Hypostasis, I confess 
Thee to be God: Triune Deity, co-enthroned and co-ruling; and to Thee I raise 
the great thrice-holy hymn that is sung on high. 
 Both now ..., Thou didst give birth and art yet a virgin, and in both thou 
didst remain by nature inviolate. He who is born maketh new the laws of 
nature, and the womb bringeth forth without travail. When God so willeth, the 
natural order is overcome: for He doeth whatsoever He wills.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O 
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach 
me, O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, of the basket of Moses: how he was carried on 
the surging waves of the river as if in a tabernacle; and thus avoided the bitter 
execution of Pharaoh’s decree. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
If thou hast heard of the midwives who once killed in its infancy the manly 
action of chastity O wretched soul; then be like the great Moses, and be suckled 
on wisdom. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast not struck and killed the wretched mind, like Moses the great did 
to the Egyptian, O my soul. Tell me then, how canst thou go and dwell in the 
desert emptied of passions through repentance?  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Moses the great went to dwell in the desert, come and seek to emulate his 
way of life, O my soul, that thou mayest attain to the vision of God in the bush. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Picture before thyself, O my soul, the rod of Moses striking the sea and 
making firm the deep by the sign of the divine Cross, by which thou canst also 
do great things. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Aaron offered to God a blameless and undefiled fire, but Hophni and 
Phinehas brought to Him, as hast thou O my soul, a strange fire and a defiled 
life. 
Glory ..., We glorify Thee, O Trinity, one God, simple essence and unity, 
and we worship Thee forever singing, “Holy! Holy! Holy!” Father, Son and 
Holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., O most pure Virgin Mother who knew not a man, God the 
creator of all things became incarnate through thee, uniting Himself to our 
human nature. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate 
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised 
up my life from corruption. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The waves of my sins, O Savior, have returned and of a sudden engulfed 
me, as of old the waters of the Red Sea engulfed the Egyptians and their 
charioteers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast made a foolish choice, O my soul, like Israel before thee; instead 
of manna from heaven, thou hast unreasonably shown a preference for the 
pleasure-loving gluttony of the passions.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The wells of Canaanitish thoughts, O my soul, hast thou prized more than 
the veined Rock from which floweth the river of Wisdom, like a chalice pouring 
forth streams of theology. 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The meat of swine, the flesh-pots and foods of Egypt hast thou preferred, 
O my soul, to the manna from heaven, as did the ungrateful people of old in 
the desert wilderness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
When Thy servant Moses struck the rock with his rod, he prefigured Thy 
life-giving side, O Savior, from whence we all draw forth the water of life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Search O my soul, like Joshua the son of Nun, and spy out the land of thine 
inheritance, and take up thy dwelling within it through the goodness of the law. 
Glory ..., “I am the Trinity, simple and undivided in Essence yet divided in 
Hypostasis. I am the Unity one in essence,” sayeth the Father, the Son, and the 
divine Spirit. 
Both now ..., Thy womb, O Theotokos, bore God who for our sakes was 
clothed in our likeness. Implore Him, the creator of all, that by thy prayers we 
may be found justified. 
Kontakion, in Tone VI : 
O My soul, O my soul, * arise! Why dost thou sleep? * The end draweth 
near, and thou shalt be confounded, * awake then and be watchful * that Christ 
thy God may spare thee, ** for He is everywhere present, and fillest all things. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil 
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but 
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Ark was being carried in a carriage, and when the ox stumbled, it was 
no more than touched, and invoked the wrath of God. O my soul, flee from 
such presumption and with reverence have respect for divine things. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard of Absalom; how he rebelled against what is natural; thou 
knowest the unholy deeds by which he defiled his father David’s bed, but 
nevertheless thou hast imitated him in his passionate and sensual-loving desires. 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast made thy free dignity subject to the flesh; for having found in 
thine enemy another Ahitophel, O my soul, thou hast acquiesced to his 
counsels. But Christ Himself hath nullified them, and redeemed thee from all of 
them. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Solomon the wonderful, who was full of the grace of wisdom, once 
committed wickedness in the sight of God and turned away from Him. By thine 
accursed life O my soul, thou hast become like him. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Consumed by sensual passions, he defiled himself, The zealot of wisdom 
hath became a zealot of prodigal women and a stranger to God. Woe is me! O 
my soul, thou hast noetically imitated him, defiling thyself with polluted desires. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast imitated Rehoboam, who paid no attention to his father’s 
counselors, and Jeroboam, that evil servant and betrayer of old. O my soul, flee 
from their example and cry unto God: “I have sinned, have compassion upon 
me.” 
Glory ..., O simple and undivided Trinity, one in essence and nature, Light 
and Lights, one Holy and three Holies, God; is praised as the Trinity. Therefore 
sing praises to Him, O my soul, and glorify the Life and Lives, the God of all. 
 Both now ..., We praise thee, we bless thee and we venerate thee, O 
Birthgiver of God, for from the undivided Trinity hast thou brought forth the 
only Son of God, opening unto us the heavenly realms on earth. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom 
tremble the Cherubim and Seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * 
praise, bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast emulated Uzziah, O my soul, and hast twofold the leprosy he 
had: for thy thoughts are futile, and thy deeds unlawful. Leave what thou hast, 
and hasten to repentance. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast heard how the men of Nineveh repented before God 
in sackcloth and ashes. Thou hast not imitated them, but rather art more wicked 
than all who have sinned before the Law, and after the Law.  

--- PAGE 25 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, how Jeremiah cried lamenting for the city of 
Zion while in the muddy pit, seeking tears. Follow then, his life of lamentation 
and be saved. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Jonah fled to Tarshish, foreseeing the conversion of the men of Nineveh; 
for as a prophet he knew the compassionate goodness of God, and was jealous 
that his prophecy should not be proved wrong. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast heard how Daniel stopped the mouths of the wild 
beasts in the pit; and thou knowest how the Children with Azarias, by their faith 
quenched the flames of the fiery furnace. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
All the names of the Old Testament have I set before thee, O my soul, as 
examples. Emulate the god-loving deeds of the righteous and flee from the sins 
of the wicked.  
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
O beginningless Father, co-eternal Son, and gracious Comforter, the Spirit 
of righteousness, Begetter of the Word of God, Word of the eternal Father, 
Spirit living and creative, O Trinity in unity, have mercy on me. 
 Both now ..., As from purple silk, O undefiled virgin, the spiritual robe of 
Emmanuel was woven within thy womb. Wherefore we proclaim thee to be the 
Theotokos in truth. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ was being tempted, tempted by the devil O my soul, who showed 
Him the stones that they might be made bread, and led Him up into a 
mountain, to see all the kingdoms of the world in an instant. O my soul, look 
with fear on what happened; watch and pray every hour to God 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The gentle Dove who loved the desert wilderness, the voice of one crying 
aloud, the Lamp of Christ, preached repentance; but Herod sinned with 
Herodias. O my soul, watch that thou be not trapped in the snares of the 
lawless ones, rather, embrace repentance 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Forerunner of Grace went to dwell in the desert wilderness, and Judaea 
and all Samaria hastened to hear him; they confessed their sins and were eagerly 
baptized. But thou, O my soul, hast not imitated them.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Marriage is honorable, and the marriage-bed undefiled, for on both Christ 
hath given His blessing, eating in the flesh at the wedding in Cana, turning the 
water into wine, and revealing His first miracle, that thou, O my soul, may 
change thy life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ healed the paralyzed man, and he took up his bed; He raised from the 
dead the young man, the son of the widow, and the centurion’s child-servant; 
He appeared to the woman of Samaria and spoke to thee, O my soul, of 
worship in spirit. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Lord healed the woman with an issue of blood, through the touching of 
the hem of His garment; He cleansed lepers, and restored the blind and the 
lame to health; He cured the deaf and the dumb, and the woman bowed to the 
ground, by His word, that thou, O wretched soul, may be brought to salvation.  
Glory ..., Let us glorify the Father, let us exalt the Son, and with faith let us 
worship the Holy Spirit of God, the indivisible Trinity and Unity in essence, Let 
us worship Light and Lights, the Life and Lives Who granteth light and life unto 
the ends of the Earth. 
Both now ..., Watch over thy City O most pure Birthgiver of God, for 
through Thee she reigneth in faith, and by thee she is strengthened, and by thee 
she is victorious, overcoming every temptation, despoiling the enemy, and 
ruling her faithful subjects. 
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us. 
O venerable Andrew, thrice-blessed father and pastor of Crete, cease not to 
offer prayer for those who sing thy praises, that all who faithfully honor thy 
memory may be delivered from danger, distress, and from corruption and sin. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
 
We Continue with Psalm IV, and the rest of Great Compline 
 
