--- PAGE 1 ---
TRIODION 
FIRST WEEK OF LENT: THURSDAY MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
 Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once. Then followeth the 1st chanting 
of the Psalter (Kathisma VI) and the Sessional Hymns from the 
Oktoechos
Sessional Hymn, by Joseph, in Tone II: 
 in the Tone of the week. Then followeth the 2nd chanting of 
the Psalter (Kathisma VII) and: 
O Word of god, Thou didst make Thy disciples * beacons illumining the 
ends of the earth by their preaching! * Illumine our hearts with the light of the 
virtues; * Cleanse us through fasting; * Grant Thy servants repentance and 
conversion * That we may glorify Thee, O Savior, ** Thou only supremely 
good One! 
Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Repeat: O Word of god, Thou didst make ... 
 Both now ..., in Tone II: 
O Theotokos turn not away from me * who am in need of thy help! * for 
my soul trusteth in thee: ** do thou have mercy on me! 
Then the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VIII) followed by: 
Sessional Hymn; by Theodore, in Tone V: 
We entreat ye, twelve apostles: * intercede for us that we may in peace 
practice abstinence, * the most glorious of those virtues that abide in heaven, * 
so that we may gain the fruits of salvation! * for ye are indeed a strong support 
to us on earth ** and a refuge for our souls! 
Glory ...,  
Repeat: We entreat ye, twelve apostles ..., 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone V: 
O Theotokos, in truth we confess thee * to be worthy of all praise; * truly 
higher than the heavens * and more holy than the Cherubim. * Through thee 
we sinners gain salvation * and find protection in temptations! * cease not to 
intercede on our behalf, ** for thou art a strong support and refuge for our 
souls! 
 Psalm 50, Then: “O God save thy people ...,” Lord have mercy (40 times): 
Followed by the canons from the Menaion and the Triodion: Consult the 
rubrics for the order of reading (Mother Mary’s Lenten Triodion). Note: 
After ODE III there is a small litany, followed by the Sessional Hymns 
from the Menaion: After ODE VI there is a small litany, followed by the 
Kontakion and Ikos from the Menaion and/or Triodion. 
After ODE III there is a small litany, followed by the Sessional Hymns 
from the Menaion: 
The tri-ode canon, by Joseph in Tone II: 
ODE IV: First canon: 
Irmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come forth, not as an ambassador, * 
nor as an Angel, * but the very Lord himself incarnate, * and didst save 
me, the whole man; * wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Become as lightning, my soul, receiving the flashing rays of abstinence, and 
flee from the obscurity of sin: that through the Divine Spirit the light of 
forgiveness may enlighten thee as the rising sun. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The deceiver enticed and captured me with the hook of pleasure. But, as ye 
caught the whole world in your net by your preaching O apostles, deliver me 
also from his malice. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Glorious apostles, ye shine as rays from the Sun of glory, dispelling the 
eclipse of delusion. Let your light also fall on me, for I am darkened by every 
evil. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 

--- PAGE 3 ---
O Virgin I cry out to thee day and night in my affliction, encircled by thy 
help and strength, I shall be saved, and easily leap the hurdle of sensual 
pleasure. 
Second canon; by Theodore in Tone V: 
Irmos: The works of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * filled the prophet 
Habakkuk with wonder, * for Thou hast come to bring salvation to Thy 
people, * and to save all Thine anointed ones. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Effulgent with the radiance of the sun of righteousness, O ye apostles, you 
give light to this earthly world, driving away the gloomy darkness of delusion. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O ye apostles, lyres of the Savior, played by the Spirit; preaching to the ends 
of the earth, ye sing a melody pleasing to the ear, converting the world to God. 
Glory ..., Let us glorify the Trinity, unity in essence; let us sing the praises of 
the one Lord God, the Father unbegotten, the Son begotten and the Spirit of 
life. 
 Both now ..., A virgin hath conceived, O Lord, and given birth to Thee, 
Emmanuel; for Thou hast come to bring salvation to Thy people, and to save 
all of Thine anointed ones in Thy love for mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
O ye divine and honored company of twelve apostles, we entreat you to 
pray unto Christ on our behalf, that with a firm resolve we may pass through 
the period of the forty days. 
Katavasia: The works of Thy dispensation, O Lord, * filled the prophet 
Habakkuk with wonder, * for Thou hast come to bring salvation to Thy 
people, * and to save all Thine anointed ones. 
After ODE VI there is a small litany, followed by the Kontakion and 
Ikos from the Menaion and/or the martyricon. 
ODE VIII  
First canon 
Irmos: The three holy children were not obedient * to the decree of the 
tyrant; * and cast into the furnace they confessed God, singing: * O all ye 
Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Let us abstain from every pleasure; let us enrich our powers of perception 
through fasting, and let us drink gladly the cup of compunction, as we sing: all 
ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
O ye apostles, when ye sit with Christ to judge all mankind, even though I 
deserve condemnation for my many sins, intercede on my behalf, that I may be 
granted a place at His right hand. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Cleansed by the fast, let us go up into the chariot of the divine virtues, 
making our mind ascend on wings to the heights of heaven, as we sing: all ye 
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord! 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
O Virgin, thou didst bear the fire of the Godhead, yet remained 
unconsumed, do thou burn up the passions of our souls, for in faith we call 
upon thee with the angelic salutation, since it is thou alone who didst bring us 
joy! 
Second canon; 
Irmos: Thy venerable children sang Thy praises * in the furnace, O 
Christ, * and they cried aloud: * all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
We praise the trumpets of the spirit, the disciples of Christ, and we cry 
aloud: all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord!  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
We praise the disciples of Christ who offer intercession for the world and 
drive away all delusion, and we cry aloud: all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord! 
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
We praise the all-holy Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, and we sing: all ye 
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord! 
Both now ..., With all mankind we sing the praises of thine ineffable 
childbearing, and with true devotion we cry aloud, pure virgin: all ye works of 
the Lord, bless ye the Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Pray for us, O ye apostles, that we may complete these days of cleansing in 
peace, as we cry aloud: all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord! 
Verse: We praise, we bless and we worship the Lord, hymning and 
supremely exalting Him throughout all ages! 
 
Katavasia: Thy venerable children sang Thy praises * in the furnace, O 
Christ, * and they cried aloud: * all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord! 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX:  
First canon 
Irmos: Thou didst contain within thy Womb * the God whom nothing 
can contain, * and hast brought forth joy to the world, * wherefore we 
sing thy praises, * O Virgin Theotokos. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Cast into the gaping deep of sensual pleasure, I call upon the abyss of Thy 
tender compassion: O Helmsman, save me! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O fountain of compassion, grant unto me compunction and cries of sorrow, 
that I may lament the boundless ocean of my evil deeds. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
By the holy prayers of Thy disciples, Jesus grant that I may venerate Thy 
divine passion and Thine awesome Resurrection. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
Thou hast made our earthly nature heavenly, O all-immaculate Virgin, for 
God took up his dwelling in thy womb: do thou deliver us all from all dangers! 
Second canon; 
Irmos: O Christ, we magnify Thine all-immaculate and pure mother, * 
for in a manner surpassing nature, * she bore Thee in the flesh, * 
delivering us from all manner of deception. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The apostles prophetically drew the water of immortality from the font of 
the Savior, ever giving the thirsty drink from the teachings of His life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
O apostles, princes of the King of heaven, ye have subdued the whole 
inhabited earth, so that it honoreth Him alone, worshiping and giving glory to 
Him as God. 
Glory ..., Trinity, undivided unity, all-creative and all-powerful, Father, Son 
and Holy Spirit, Thou art my God, and Lord and light; I sing Thy praises and I 
worship Thee. 
 Both now ..., We and every generation call thee blessed, O pure Virgin 
mother, for thou art the mercy-seat of the universe, O thou who hast ineffably 
borne the Savior and creator. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
O ye choir of apostles, keep safe those who praise you, and grant that they 
may pass with a contrite heart through all the days of the light-giving fast. 
Katavasia: O Christ, we magnify Thine all-immaculate and pure mother, 
* for in a manner surpassing nature, * she bore Thee in the flesh, * 
delivering us from all manner of deception. 
Then: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God. * More honorable than the 
Cherubim, * and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, * 
who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, * the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
The Small Litany. 
The Exapostilarion for Thursday, in the Tone of the week. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone III: 
Thou hast appointed repentance for me, a sinner, O Lord, * and because of 
Thy boundless mercy, * desired to save me, who am unworthy, * wherefore I 
fall down before Thee in prayer: * do Thou humble my soul through fasting, ** 
for I have fled to Thee O Lord who alone art abundant in mercy! 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Thou hast appointed repentance... 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Even after death ye shone like beacons in the world, * O holy martyrs! * 
Having struggled in right noble endeavors; * wherefore, having boldness before 
Christ, ** entreat Him to have mercy on our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
O Theotokos, * thou intercessor for all who pray to thee: * in thee do we 
have boldness, * in thee do we boast, * and in thee do we place all our hope. * 
Pray thou unto Him who was born from thee, ** on behalf of thine 
unprofitable servants.  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 

--- PAGE 8 ---
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
FIRST WEEK OF LENT, THURSDAY 
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone I: 
Do Thou deliver us, O Lord, from enemies visible and invisible, * that the 
gentiles may never say: * where is their God? * Let them understand, O master, 
* that Thou dost forgive the sins ** of Thy repentant people. 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone I: 
Prokeimenon: When the Lord hath turned back the captivity of his 
people, * Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad 
Verse: The fool hath said in his heart: there is no God! 
 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (2:11-21) 
The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall 
be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of 
the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon 
every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low: And upon all the cedars 
of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, And 
upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, And upon 
every high tower, and upon every fenced wall, And upon all the ships of 
Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be 
bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord 
alone shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall utterly abolish. And 
they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear 
of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly 
the earth. In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, 
which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; 
To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear 
of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly 
the earth. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Lord, who shall abide in Thy tabernacle, * and who shall 
dwell in Thy holy mountain? 
Verse: He that walketh blamelessly, and worketh righteousness. 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
FIRST WEEK OF LENT, THURSDAY  
VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, by St. Joseph, in Tone II: 
I have been darkened by the adversary’s deceits, O my Christ, * do Thou 
enlighten me, * O enlightener of the faithful, * who didst darken the sun as 
Thou didst hang upon the Cross, * granting deliverance, so that as I walk in the 
light of Thy precepts ** I may purely behold the saving rays of Thy 
resurrection! 
Hanging as a vine upon the tree, O Savior, * Thou didst satisfy the earth 
with the wine of incorruption, * wherefore, I cry unto Thee: * I have been 
drunk always and darkened with sinfulness. * Satisfy me with the sweet and true 
drink of compunction, * and strengthen me now through abstinence from 
pleasures ** O my gracious Savior and Lover of mankind! 
Great are the wonders of the Cross! * it planted abstinence firmly in the 
church, * and uprooted Adam’s lack thereof in paradise, * one tree in Eden 
brought death to mankind, * but another on Golgotha granted eternal life to the 
world. * The Cross is the fountain of paradise * which released Thy life-bearing 
blood and water. * By Thy cross, do Thou gladden our Lenten joy, * O God of 
Israel ** as one abundant in mercy. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., From the Menaion.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: I will bless the Lord who giveth me understanding, * 
moreover even till night have my reins instructed me. 
Verse: Keep me, O God, for in Thee have I hoped! 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS 
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were 
created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens, And 
every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field 
before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and 
there was not a man to till the ground. But there went up a mist from the earth, 
and watered the whole face of the ground. And the Lord God formed man of 
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man 
became a living soul. And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; 

--- PAGE 11 ---
and there he put the man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made 
the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for 
food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge 
of good and evil. And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from 
thence it was parted, and became into four heads. The name of the first is 
Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is 
gold; And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone. 
And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the 
whole land of Ethiopia. 14 And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it 
which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates. And 
the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it 
and to keep it. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree 
of the garden thou mayest freely eat: But of the tree of the knowledge of good 
and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die. And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be 
alone; I will make him an help meet for him. And out of the ground the Lord 
God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought 
them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called 
every living creature, that was the name thereof. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Keep me, O Lord as the apple of thine eye, * in the 
shelter of Thy wings wilt Thou shelter me. 
Verse: Hearken O Lord, unto my righteousness, attend unto my 
supplication, give ear unto my prayer, which cometh not from deceitful 
lips. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS 
My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments: For 
length of days, and long life, and peace, shall they add to thee. Let not mercy 
and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of 
thine heart: So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of 
God and man. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine 
own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy 
paths. Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil. It 
shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones. Honour the Lord with 
thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase: So shall thy barns be 
filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. My son, 
despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction: For 
whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son in whom he 

--- PAGE 12 ---
delighteth. Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth 
understanding. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of 
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies: and 
all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. Length of days 
is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour. Her ways are ways 
of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay 
hold upon her: and happy is every one that retaineth her. The Lord by wisdom 
hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens. By 
his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew. 
Litany: Let us complete ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone IV: 
Desiring to commune of the divine Pascha, * the Pascha not from Egypt, 
but from Zion, * let us renounce the drink of sin through repentance! * let us 
gird our loins with the mortification of pleasures! * let us cover our feet with 
shoes that tread no evil path! * let us be confirmed with the shield of faith! * let 
us not imitate the enemies of the Master’s Cross! * Rather, let us pursue victory 
over the devil through fasting ** for the sake of our Savior, who showed us the 
way! 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us.  
Repeat: Desiring to commune of the divine ... 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Thou art glorified in the memory of Thy martyrs, * O Christ God, * they 
entreat Thee on our behalf, ** to send down upon us Thy great mercy! 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee * nailed to the Cross, O Lord, * the ewe-
lamb, Thy Mother, marveled * and cried out: “What is this that I see, * O my 
Son most desired? How hast Thou been rewarded by the unfaithful and 
iniquitous assembly * which hath enjoyed Thy many miracles? * Yet glory to 
Thine ineffable condescension, O Master!”  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  

--- PAGE 13 ---
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord have mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Holy God, Holy Mighty ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ...,  
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
Reader: O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible 
Kingdom, and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a 
sinner; make steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine 
every defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: 
One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore (Thrice). Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
PSALM 33 (READ OR SUNG) 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
GREAT COMPLINE 
CANON OF ST. ANDREW OF CRETE 
THURSDAY OF THE FIRST WEEK 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: Amen. Glory to Thee our God ..., Heavenly King ..., Holy God ..., 
Our Father.  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Reader: Lord Have Mercy (12 times)..., Glory ..., Both now ..., O come let us 
worship ..., Then:  
PSALM 69 
O God, be attentive unto helping me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Let 
them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned 
back and brought to shame that desire evils against me. Let them be turned 
back straightway in shame that say unto me: Well done! Well done! Let them be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all that seek after Thee, O God, and let them that love 
Thy salvation say continually: The Lord be magnified. But as for me, I am poor 
and needy; O God, come unto mine aid. My helper and my deliverer art Thou, 
O Lord; make no long tarrying.  
Immediately there follows the fourth stasis of the great canon: 
ODE I 
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My 
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him 
* for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of all, take from me the heavy 
yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me tears of compunction 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I fall down before Thee O Jesus: I have sinned against Thee, be merciful to 
me. Take from me the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, 
grant me tears of compunction.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Enter not into judgment with me, setting before me things I have done, 
examining my words, and correcting my disordered impulses. But according to 
Thine abundant compassion, overlook my wickedness, and save me O Almighty 
One. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
It is the time for repentance, wherefore I come to Thee, my Creator. Take 
from me the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me 
tears of compunction.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As the Prodigal, O Savior, I have wasted the substance of my soul in sin, 
and I am barren of the virtues of holiness. In my hunger I cry: O Giver of 
mercy, come out quickly to meet me and take pity on me. 
Refrain: Holy Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Bowing before the divine laws of Christ, thou didst draw near to Him, and 
having forsaken the unbridled lust of sensual pleasure; in the fear of God thou 
didst attain unto all the God-pleasing virtues as if one.  
Glory ..., O Trinity beyond all essence and worshiped in unity, take from me 
the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me tears of 
compunction. 
 Both now ..., O Theotokos, thou hope and protection of those who sing 
unto Thee, take from me the heavy yoke of sin and O Lady, as one pure, accept 
me in penitence. 
ODE II 
Irmos: Behold now, and see * that I am God, * Who by My right hand 
and by My power alone * rained down manna in the days of old, * and 
made springs of water * flow from the barren rock, * for My people in the 
wilderness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
“I have slain a man to my grief and wounding, and a young man to my 
detriment” cried Lamech lamenting; dost thou not tremble O my soul, for thou 
hast defiled thy flesh and polluted thy mind?  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Skillfully didst thou plan to build a tower, O my soul, and establish a 
stronghold for thy wanton lusts; had the Creator not confounded thy designs 
and dashed thy crafty plans to the ground. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O how I have emulated Lamech, the murderer, slaying my soul as it were a 
man, and my mind as it were a young man, and as Cain the murderer killed his 
brother, so have I killed my body with sensual desires. 
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Lord once rained down fire from heaven and burnt up those who dwelt 
in Sodom, roused to anger by their transgressions. And thou, O my soul, hast 
kindled within the fire of Gehenna, and there shalt thou burn. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have been assaulted and wounded; behold, the arrows of the enemy which 
have pierced my soul and body; behold the lesions, the sores and injuries, which 
cry to God on behalf of the wounds of my freely-chosen passions.  
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst lift up thine hands to the compassionate God O Mary, having 
sunk into the abyss of sin, and, as once He did to Peter, so also in His love for 
mankind, He stretched forth His hand to help thee, in every way seeking thy 
conversion. 
Glory ..., Trinity uncreated and without beginning, O undivided Unity: 
accept me in repentance and save me, a sinner. I am Thy creation, reject me 
not; but spare me and deliver me from the fire of condemnation.  
 Both now ..., O most pure Lady, Birthgiver of God, the hope of those who 
run to thee and the haven of the storm-tossed: pray to the merciful God, thy 
Creator and thy Son, that He may grant His mercy even to me. 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my 
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast become like Hagar the Egyptian: thy free choice hath 
become enslaved, and thou hast borne a new Ishmael, stubbornness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou knowest, O my soul, how the ladder that was shown to Jacob, reached 
from earth to heaven. Why hast thou not provided a firm foundation for such a 
passage through piety? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The priest of God, the king set apart, whose life was an image of Christ 
among men in the world, do thou emulate him. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Turn back, wretched soul, and lament, before the fairground of life cometh 
to an end, before the Lord shutteth the door of the bridal chamber. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Be not turned into a pillar of salt O my soul, looking back: Fear the example 
of the people of Sodom, and find salvation in the mount of Zoar. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Reject not, O Master, the prayer of those who sing Thy praises, but in Thy 
loving-kindness be merciful and grant forgiveness to them that ask with faith. 
Glory ..., O simple Unity praised in a Trinity of Hypostases, uncreated 
beginningless Essence, save us who in faith worship Thy power. 
 Both now ..., O Birthgiver of God, who without knowing a man hast given 
birth within time to a Son, who was begotten outside time from the Father; and, 
strange wonder! thou givest suck while remaining a Virgin.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. 
* How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * 
and he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to 
Thy power, O Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The time of my life is short, and filled with illness and wickedness. But 
accept me in repentance and call me back to knowledge, that I not become the 
possession and food of the enemy; but do Thou, O Savior, have compassion 
upon me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
A man of great wealth and righteousness, abounding in riches and livestock, 
clothed in royal dignity, in a crown and purple robe, Job was suddenly stripped 
of wealth, glory and kingship, and became a beggar. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
If he who was righteous and blameless above all men did not escape the 
snares and pits of the deceiver, what wilt thou do, O wretched and sin-loving 
soul, when some sudden misfortune befalleth thee ? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Now I speak boastfully, with boldness of heart; but to no avail and in vain, 
may I not be condemned with the Pharisee, but rather grant me the humility of 
the Publican, O righteous Judge, who alone art compassionate, and number me 
with him.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I know, O compassionate One, that I have sinned and violated the vessel of 
my body. But accept me in repentance and call me back to knowledge. Let me 
not become the possession and food of the enemy; but do Thou, O Savior, 
have compassion upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have become mine own idol, utterly defiling my soul with the passions, O 
compassionate One. But accept me in repentance and call me back to 
knowledge. Let me not become the possession and food of the enemy; but do 
Thou, O Savior, have compassion upon me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have not hearkened to Thy voice, I have not heeded Thy Scripture, O 
Giver of the Law. But accept me in repentance and call me back to divine 
knowledge. Let me not become the possession and food of the enemy; but do 
Thou, O Savior, have pity on me.  
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Having descended into an abyss of great iniquity, thou was not held captive 
therein: but with better thinking didst gloriously ascend the heights of virtue 
through action, and the angelic orders, O Mary, were amazed.  
Glory ..., Undivided in Essence, uncommingled in Hypostasis, I confess 
Thee to be God: Triune Deity, co-enthroned and co-ruling; and to Thee I raise 
the great thrice-holy hymn that is sung on high. 
 Both now ..., Thou didst give birth and art yet a virgin, and in both thou 
didst remain by nature inviolate. He who is born maketh new the laws of 
nature, and the womb bringeth forth without travail. When God so willeth, the 
natural order is overcome: for He doeth whatsoever He wills.  
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O 
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach 
me, O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Imitate the woman who was bowed down to the ground, O my soul; come 
and fall down at the feet of Jesus, that He may make thee straight again; and 
thou shalt walk upright upon the paths of the Lord. 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As Thou art a deep well, O Master; flow forth unto me water from Thy pure 
veins, that like the woman of Samaria I may drink thereof and thirst no more; 
for from Thee floweth the streams of life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
May my tears be to me like the pool of Siloam, O Master and Lord, that I 
also may cleanse the eyes of my heart, and with my mind behold Thee, the pre-
eternal Light. 
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
With an incomparable and exceedingly rich love, thou didst desire to 
venerate the wood of the Cross, and wast deemed worthy to fulfill thy desire. 
Make me also worthy to attain the glory on high. 
Glory ..., We glorify Thee, O Trinity, one God, simple essence and unity, 
and we worship Thee forever singing, “Holy! Holy! Holy!” Father, Son and 
Holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., O most pure Virgin Mother who kneweth not a man, God the 
creator of all things became incarnate through thee, uniting Himself to our 
human nature. 
ODE VI 
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate 
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised 
up my life from corruption. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am like the coin, O Savior, marked with the likeness of the King, which of 
old Thou didst lose. But light Thy lamp, O Word, Thy Fore-runner, and seek 
and find Thine image again. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Rise up and make war, as did Joshua against Amalek, against the passions of 
the flesh, ever gaining the victory over the Gibeonites, thy deceitful thoughts. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst ceaselessly shed streams of tears, and with thy soul afire, 
quenched the burning of the passions O Mary, grant also unto me thy servant, 
the grace of these thy tears.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst attain to heavenly passionlessness, through the perfection of thy 
life on earth, O Mother, wherefore we hymn thee, and beseech thee to intercede 
on our behalf, that we may be delivered from the passions. 
Glory ..., “I am the Trinity, simple and undivided in Essence yet divided in 
Hypostasis. I am the Unity one in essence,” sayeth the Father, the Son, and the 
divine Spirit. 
Both now ..., Thy womb, O Theotokos, bore God who for our sakes was 
clothed in our likeness. Implore Him, the creator of all, that by thy prayers we 
may be found justified. 
Kontakion, in Tone VI: 
O My soul, O my soul, * arise! Why dost thou sleep? * The end draweth 
near, and thou shalt be confounded, * awake then and be watchful * that Christ 
thy God may spare thee, ** for He is everywhere present, and fillest all things. 
ODE VII 
Irmos: We have sinned, we have transgressed, * and we have done evil 
before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, but 
reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like a dream of one awakening my days have vanished; wherefore, like 
Hezekiah, I weep upon my bed, that years may be added to my life. But what 
Isaiah will come to help, O my soul, except the God of all? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I fall down before Thee, and bring to Thee my words as tears. I have sinned 
as never did the Harlot, and I have transgressed as no other man on earth. But 
have compassion upon Thy creature, O Master, and call me back. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have buried Thine image and broken Thy commandment. All my beauty 
hath been destroyed O Savior, and my lamp hath been quenched by the 
passions, but have compassion upon me, as David once sang, and “restore to 
me Thy joy.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Turn back, repent, uncover thine hidden things, and tell God, before whom 
all things are known; “Thou alone knowest my secrets, O only Savior; “have 
mercy on me”, as David once sang, “according to Thy mercy.” 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Raising thy lament to the most pure Mother of God, thou didst first drive 
away the fury of the passions which, of necessity, assailed thee, then didst thou 
put the enemy to shame. Do thou ever grant help to me thy suffering servant. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
To Him whom thou hast loved, and whom thou didst desire, and for whose 
sake thou didst wear out thy flesh, O venerable one, to Christ pray now on 
behalf of us thy servants, that He may be merciful to us all, and grant a peaceful 
life to those who with honor worship Him.  
Glory ..., O simple and undivided Trinity, one in essence and nature, Light 
and Lights, one Holy and three Holies, God; is praised as the Trinity. Therefore 
sing praises to Him, O my soul, and glorify the Life and Lives, the God of all. 
 Both now ..., We praise thee, we bless thee and we venerate thee, O 
Birthgiver of God, for from the undivided Trinity hast thou brought forth the 
only Son of God, opening unto us the heavenly realms on earth. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom 
tremble the Cherubim and Seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * 
praise, bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Savior, I pour out upon Thine head as precious oil, the alabaster box of 
my tears, and like the Harlot, I cry out to Thee, seeking Thy mercy: I bring my 
prayer to Thee and ask of Thee forgiveness.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
None hath sinned against Thee as I; yet accept even me, O compassionate 
and good Savior, for I repent in fear and cry with love: Against Thee only have 
I sinned; I have transgressed, have mercy on me O merciful one. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Spare, O Savior thy creature, and as a shepherd seeketh the lost sheep that 
hath gone astray, do Thou snatch me from the wolf and make me a nursling in 
the pasture of Thine own flock. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
When Thou the Judge sittest upon Thy throne, since Thou art 
compassionate, Thou wilt reveal Thy fearful glory, O Savior, what fear there 
shall be then! When the furnace burns with fire, and all shrink back in fear 
before Thy Judgment-seat. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
The Mother of the never-setting Light illumined thee and delivered thee 
from the darkness of the passions. Since thou hast recourse to the grace of the 
Spirit, O Mary, enlighten those who praise thee with faith.  
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Upon beholding in thee a wonder truly strange and new, Zosimas was 
struck with amazement, O Mother. For he saw an angel in the body and filled 
with astonishment, he praiseth Christ throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
O beginningless Father, co-eternal Son, and gracious Comforter, the Spirit 
of righteousness, Begetter of the Word of God, Word of the eternal Father, 
Spirit living and creative, O Trinity in unity, have mercy on me. 
 Both now ..., As from purple silk, O undefiled virgin, the spiritual robe of 
Emmanuel was woven within thy womb. Wherefore we proclaim thee to be the 
Theotokos in truth. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Have mercy on me and save me O Son of David, Thou who with Thy word 
didst heal the possessed. Let me hear Thy compassionate voice speak unto me 
as to the thief: “Verily, I say unto thee thou shalt be with Me in Paradise, when 
I come in My glory.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
One thief accused Thee, the other thief confessed Thy Divinity: for both 
were hanging beside Thee on the Cross. Open to me also, O compassionate 
One, the door of Thy glorious Kingdom, as once it was opened to the thief 
who with faith confessed Thee to be God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Creation shuddered, upon seeing Thee crucified. Mountains and rocks were 
split from fear, the earth quaked, and Hades was despoiled; the light of day 
grew dark, at beholding Thee, O Jesus, nailed to the Cross. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Demand not from me fruits worthy of repentance, for my strength hath 
failed within me. Grant me an ever-contrite heart and poverty of spirit, that I 
may offer these unto Thee as an acceptable sacrifice, O only Savior. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my Judge, who knowest me well, when Thou comest again with the 
angels to judge the whole world, look upon me then with Thy merciful eye and 
spare me, and have compassion upon me, O Jesus, for I have sinned beyond 
that of any other man. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou hast struck all with wonder, by thy strange and wonderful way of life, 
both the ranks of angels and the race of mankind; for having surpassed nature 
thou didst live as though immaterial, traversing the Jordan with thy feet like that 
of a bodiless angel, O Mary.  
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Call down the gracious mercy of the Creator upon us who sing thy praises, 
O venerable Mother, that we may be delivered from the sufferings and 
afflictions that beset us; that without ceasing, we may magnify the Lord who 
hath glorified thee.  
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us. 
O venerable Andrew, thrice-blessed father and pastor of Crete, ceaselessly 
offer prayer on behalf of those who sing thy praises, that all who faithfully 
honor thy memory may be delivered from danger, distress, and from corruption 
and sin. 
Glory ..., Let us glorify the Father, let us exalt the Son, and with faith let us 
worship the Holy Spirit of God, the indivisible Trinity and Unity in essence, Let 
us worship Light and Lights, the Life and Lives Who granteth light and life unto 
the ends of the Earth. 
Both now ..., Watch over thy City O most pure Birthgiver of God, for 
through Thee she reigneth in faith, and by thee she is strengthened, and by thee 
she is victorious, overcoming every temptation, despoiling the enemy, and 
ruling her faithful subjects. 
Katavasia: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
 
We Continue with Psalm IV, and the rest of Great Compline 
