--- PAGE 1 ---
TRIODION 
FIRST WEEK OF LENT: FRIDAY MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once. Then followeth the 1st chanting 
of the Psalter (Kathisma XIII) and the Sessional Hymns from the 
Oktoechos
Sessional Hymn, by Joseph, in Tone II: 
 in the Tone of the week. Then followeth the 2nd chanting of 
the Psalter (Kathisma XIV) and: 
By Thy passion hast Thou granted all mankind * freedom from passions! * 
By Thy divine Cross hast Thou put to death * the passions of my flesh; * count 
me worthy also, O Lord, ** to see Thy holy resurrection. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
 Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Stavrotheotokion: Guarded by the precious Cross of thy son, * O pure Lady 
Theotokos, * we easily turn away all the assaults of the enemy! * Therefore we 
rightly call thee blessed, * for thou art the mother of light ** and the only hope 
of our souls! 
 Then the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma XV) followed by: 
Sessional Hymn; by Theodore, in Tone II: 
Thou art the source and fountain of purity, * O Merciful Lord; * Preserve us 
in the fast. * Behold us as we fall down before Thee, * look upon the lifting up 
of our hands, * for Thou didst stretch out Thy hands upon the tree * and wast 
crucified for the sake of all those born on earth, ** O only Lord of the angelic 
powers! 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone II: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee, O Christ, stretched dead upon the tree, 
* Thy virgin Mother cried out with bitter tears: * O my son, what is this fearful 
mystery? * How dost Thou give eternal life to all, **and yet willingly suffer a 
shameful death upon the Cross? 
 Psalm 50, Then: “O God save thy people ...,” Lord have mercy (40 times): 
Followed by the canons from the Menaion and the Triodion: Consult the 
rubrics for the order of reading (Mother Mary’s Lenten Triodion). Note: 
After ODE III there is a small litany, followed by the Sessional Hymns 
from the Menaion:  
The tri-ode canon, by Joseph, in Tone II: 
ODE V: First canon 
Irmos: O Christ my Savior, the enlightenment of those lying in the 
darkness of sin. * I rise early to hymn Thee O King of Peace, * enlighten 
me with Thy radiance, * for I know no other God than Thee. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Seeing the sinfulness that is in me, The deceitful enemy worketh within me 
and urgeth me to sin: For he truly rejoiceth over my perdition. But I entreat 
Thee, O Savior, Grant me amendment of life that I may destroy him! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
By Thy Cross Thou hast triumphed over the powers of darkness, do Thou 
deliver me from their wickedness, for I am fallen into the depth of sin and a pit 
of iniquity; but by Thy mercy, I hope to be saved. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Christ, Thou didst hang dead upon the cross: do Thou restore life to my 
soul, deadened through sin, and count me worthy to attain Thy holy 
resurrection in peace, Obediently fulfilling Thy commandments. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
O Pure maiden, thou art a light to me in my infirmity and the salvation of 
my darkened soul; Save me, O save me, for I perish! Clothe me, corrupted by 
my grievous sins, in a garment of incorruption! 
Second canon; by Theodore, in Tone II: 
Irmos: The night is far spent, the day is at hand: * Thy light hath shone 
upon the world! * Therefore the ranks of angels sing Thy praises, * and 
all things glorify Thee, O Lord! 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord 
Thou alone art immortal, yet didst accept to be crucified in the flesh at the 
place of the skull, fashioning mankind anew O Lord, and granting him 
immortality. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord 
When creation beheld the offense of Thy passion, O Lord, It was wholly 
changed, lamenting Thy murder by Thine own people. But Thou didst patiently 
endure these things to save the whole of creation! 
Glory ..., O all-holy Trinity, we worship Thee: Thou art our refuge and our 
strength. We sing Thy praises O Thou Who art a Unity in essence: Send down 
upon us the forgiveness of our sins. 
 Both now ..., Rejoice, O Theotokos, maiden of many names: Tabernacle, 
vessel of manna and altar-table, light-bearing Candlestick; The burning bush, 
and the mountain overshadowed by God! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Saying farewell to the world and all that is in it, Let us now be crucified with 
Christ; Let us endure outrage, mockery and other sufferings, That we may be 
glorified in him. 
Katavasia: The night is far spent, the day is at hand: * Thy light hath 
shone upon the world! * Therefore the ranks of angels sing Thy praises, * 
and all things glorify Thee, O Lord! 
After ODE VI there is a small litany, followed by the Kontakion and 
Ikos from the Menaion and/or the martyricon. 
ODE VIII  
First canon 
Irmos: God Who descended into the fiery furnace * with the Hebrew 
children, * and transformed the flame into dew, * do ye works hymn, * 
and supremely exalt as Lord throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
In Thy compassion Thou didst humble Thyself on the cross, raising up with 
Thyself the one who had fallen of old through eating from the tree. Wherefore 
Thou art glorified, O Lord, and we sing Thy praises throughout the ages! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Through heedlessness I have fallen into the heavy sleep of sin, but, O my 
Christ, who for my sake didst fall asleep on the Cross, awaken me, that the 
night of death not consume me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Blinded by sensual pleasures, I bear within me a darkened soul, and the 
crafty enemy doth laugh upon seeing me. But give me light, O Christ, and ever 
deliver me from his malice. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
I have wasted my life in wantonness, And my soul is heavy with the 
drowsiness of sin. I flee to thine unsleeping intercession, O most pure Virgin: 
let me not slumber in the sleep of death! 
Second canon; 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * unto 
Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless and 
supremely exult throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord 
Crowned with thorns, O Christ, and clothed in a scarlet robe, Thou hast 
shone with glory, Surpassing in beauty all the sons of men. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord 
Thou didst drank gall and vinegar, and from Thy divine side Thou hast 
poured a double stream of life and incorruption upon those who praise and 
glorify Thee in faith forever. 
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
O Godhead, one in trinity, Undivided in nature yet divided in persons, 
Power that shall never be destroyed, Father, son and spirit, we sing Thy praises 
forever! 
Both now ..., O pure Birthgiver of God, gate of heaven and door of 
salvation, accept the prayer of all Christians who call thee blessed throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
The Cross, the scepter of Christ and strength of the Church, the victory of 
kings and guardian of Christians! Thou art my light, and my boast throughout 
all ages. 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, hymning and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages! 
Katavasia: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * 
unto Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless 
and supremely exult throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX:  
First canon 
Irmos: Thee do we magnify, O blessed and most pure Theotokos, * who 
through thy virginal womb ineffably brought forth * God incarnate, * the 
Luminary Who shone forth before the sun * and hath come to us in the 
flesh.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Hateful thoughts have covered my soul with leprosy: do Thou cleanse it, O 
Word of God, with the sprinkling of Thy blood, and since Thou didst suffer a 
shameful crucifixion for my sake O Christ, make me a partaker in Thy glory. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am bowed down to the earth, O Christ, by the burden of my sinful deeds, 
and in a gloomy despondency I cry out to Thee, O Lover of mankind: “By Thy 
precious blood heal the incurable wounds of my soul that I may sing the praises 
of Thy divinity.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have made iniquity my food and heedlessness my drink, and I continue 
without any change. I take pleasure in abstaining from food to no purpose. 
Such is not the fast of which the Lord hath spoken. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos Save us! 
Thou hast destroyed the sentence of condemnation passed upon mankind 
of old; thou art the restoration of our first mother Eve, the cause of our 
reconciliation to God, our bridge to the creator! Wherefore we magnify thee, O 
Theotokos! 
Second canon; 
Irmos: To the pure and most pure mother and Virgin, * do we the faithful 
devoutly chant with hymns, * and as the Theotokos * we magnify her. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord 
Creation quaked when Thou wast crucified upon the tree! For as God, in 
Thy loving-kindness, Thou didst suffer in the flesh for our salvation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Great is the might of Thy Cross, O Lord, For signing ourselves with it we 
drive away at once the power of the demons. 
Glory ..., Unity of three co-equal persons, undivided Trinity, Sovereign 
nature, Father, Son and divine Spirit, save us all. 
 Both now ..., Rejoice, O Theotokos, thou mercy-seat of the world! We 
sinners, ever fleeing to thee for refuge gain reconciliation with God. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
By the divine power of Thy Cross, Lord, Give me the strength to purely and 
blamelessly offer to Thee this time of fasting. 
Katavasia: To the pure and most pure mother and Virgin, * do we the 
faithful devoutly chant with hymns, * and as the Theotokos * we magnify 
her. 
Then: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God. * More honorable than the 
Cherubim, * and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, * 
who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, * the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
The Small Litany. 
The Exapostilarion for Friday, in the Tone of the week. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VIII: 
Let us receive the proclamation of lent with joy! * For if our forefather 
Adam had kept the fast, * we would not have been deprived of paradise. * The 
fruit which killed us was beautiful to behold * and pleasurable to eat, * let us not 
therefore be fooled by our eyes, * for after food is eaten, it of no value. * Let us 
flee from intemperance, * so that we may not be conquered by passions after 
having our fill. * Let us sign ourselves with the blood of the one * Who, for our 
sake, was voluntarily led to death, * so that the destroyer might not touch us. * 
So we will partake of the sacred Pascha of Christ ** for the salvation of our 
souls. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Repeat: Let us receive the proclamation ... 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
What shall we call you, O saints? * Cherubim, for Christ rested in you? * Or 
seraphim, since ye glorify him ceaselessly? * Angels, for ye renounced the flesh? 
* Or powers, since ye perform miracles? * Many are your names, and great are 
your gifts! ** Pray ye that our souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: Creation was changed, O Savior, * when it beheld Thee 
crucified on Golgotha. * It shook and trembled, not able to endure the sight. * 
The pure Virgin, Thy mother, lamenting cried aloud: * “Woe is me, my child, 
my sweetest Savior! ** what is this new and strange and glorious sight?” 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 8 ---
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
FIRST WEEK OF LENT, FRIDAY 
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone V: 
Counter with Thy compassion, O Lord, * our sinful life and unrepentant 
souls. * For we know no other God but Thee! * Thou hast dominion over life 
and death: ** Save us, since Thou lovest mankind! 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: I will love Thee, O Lord my strength; * the Lord is my 
foundation! 
Verse: My God is my helper, and I will hope in him! 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIH (3:1-14) 
For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem 
and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole 
stay of water. The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, 
and the prudent, and the ancient. The captain of fifty, and the honourable man, 
and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator. And I will 
give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them. And the people 
shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the 
child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the 
honourable. When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his 
father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under 
thy hand: In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an healer; for in my 
house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people. For 
Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue and their doings 
are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. The shew of their 
countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, 
they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto 
themselves. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall 
eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for 
the reward of his hands shall be given him. As for my people, children are their 
oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead thee 
cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. The Lord standeth up to 
plead, and standeth to judge the people. The Lord will enter into judgment with 
the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the 
vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord, my helper * and redeemer. 
Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God! and the firmament 
proclaimeth the work of His hands.  
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
FIRST WEEK OF LENT, FRIDAY  
VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 
Six Stichera, two by St. Joseph, in Tone V:  
Come, O ye faithful! * Let us perform the works of God in the light. * Let 
us walk honestly as in the day. * Let us rid ourselves of unjust accusations 
against our neighbors, * so that we place no stumbling blocks in their way. * Let 
us put aside the pleasures of the flesh, * that we may make an increase of gifts 
to our souls. * Let us give bread to those in need. * Let us draw near to Christ 
in repentance and say: ** “Our God, have mercy on us!” (Twice) 
After which we chant 4 Stichera to the Martyrs from the Oktoechos, in 
the Tone of the week. Then four Stichera to St. Theodore the Recruit: 
 In Tone II:  
Come, all ye lovers of the martyrs: * Let us celebrate and rejoice in spirit! * 
Today the martyr Theodore offereth a mystical banquet, * Making us glad in the 
feast * that we might chant unto him: * Rejoice, unconquerable bearer of 
suffering, victor over torturers! * Rejoice, for thou didst give thy body over to 
torture for Christ God! * Rejoice, for by many trials thou wast revealed as a true 
soldier of the heavenly army! * O adornment of martyrs, ** pray thou on behalf 
of our souls! 
Thou dost extend the divinely-granted grace of thy miracles * to all who run 
to thee in faith, O martyr Theodore. * Wherefore we praise thee in song: * 
Thou dost release captives, Heal the sick, reward the poor, * and save those 
who are drowning. * Thou dost intercede for all who honor thy sacred memory. 
* Entreat Christ to grant great mercy even to us ** who praise thy suffering, O 
holy martyr! 
Thou wast revealed to be the highest gift of God, * O martyr Theodore! * 
Even after thine end thou dost grant help * to those who run to thee. * When 
the widow came to thy temple in tears, * Thou didst appear in mercy and return 
her son * who had been taken captive by alien soldiers. * O thou who dost not 
cease to work wonders: ** entreat Christ God that our souls be saved. 
I honor thee as the true gift of God, * O thrice-blessed Theodore! * For 
thou wast revealed to be an unfailing candle of the divine light: * who illumined 
all creation with thy sufferings. * More powerful than fire, thou dost quench the 
flames of, * and crushed the head of, * the evil serpent. * When thou didst go to 
thy suffering, * Christ placed a crown upon thy divine head, * since thou now 
hast great boldness before God, O martyr, ** fervently pray thou on behalf of 
our souls! 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., in Tone II: The devil used the apostate one as a vessel of evil * 
filling him with the foul thought of polluting the food of the fasting people. * 
But thou didst overcame his craftiness with wiser reasoning: * appearing to the 
Archbishop in a dream, * and revealing the wicked plot to him. * For this we 
give thanks to thee, O martyr Theodore, * and honor thee as a helper and 
deliverer. * Every year we recall this miracle at this season. * By thine 
intercessions before God, ** may we be delivered from the machinations of the 
evil one! 
 Both now ..., The Dogmaticon in the Tone of the week for Friday Vespers. 
Then, “O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord hear Thee * in the day of affliction. 
Verse: The name of the God of Jacob defend thee! 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (2:20 - 3:20) 
Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast 
of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him. And the 
Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one 
of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; And the rib, which the Lord 
God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. 
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall 
be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore shall a man 
leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be 
one flesh. And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not 
ashamed. Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which 
the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye 
shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman said unto the serpent, 
We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit of the tree 
which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither 
shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not 
surely die: For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes 
shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And when the 
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, 
and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did 
eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat. And the eyes of 
them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed 
fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. And they heard the voice of 

--- PAGE 12 ---
the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his 
wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of 
the garden. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art 
thou? And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I 
was naked; and I hid myself. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? 
Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not 
eat? And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave 
me of the tree, and I did eat. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is 
this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I 
did eat. And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, 
thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy 
belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life: And I will put 
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it 
shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. Unto the woman he said, I 
will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring 
forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over 
thee. And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, thou 
shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of 
it all the days of thy life; Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and 
thou shalt eat the herb of the field; In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, 
till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return. And Adam called his wife’s name Eve; because 
she was the mother of all living. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Be Thou exalted, O Lord, in Thy strength; * we will sing 
and chant of Thy mighty acts! 
Verse: O Lord in Thy strength the Kind shall be glad, and in Thy 
salvation he shall rejoice exceedingly 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (3:19-34) 
The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he 
established the heavens. By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the 
clouds drop down the dew. My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep 
sound wisdom and discretion: So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to 
thy neck. Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. 
When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy 

--- PAGE 13 ---
sleep shall be sweet. Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of 
the wicked, when it cometh. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall 
keep thy foot from being taken. Withhold not good from them to whom it is 
due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Say not unto thy neighbor, 
Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee. Say 
not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when 
thou hast it by thee. Devise not evil against thy neighbor, seeing he dwelleth 
securely by thee. Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no 
harm. Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways. For the 
froward is abomination to the Lord: but his secret is with the righteous. The 
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation 
of the just. Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly. 
 
And the rest of the liturgy of the Presanctified gifts 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THE CANON OF INTERCESSION TO THE HOLY AND GREAT MARTYR 
THEODORE THE RECRUIT 
NOTE: Before the liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, Kolyva is prepared and 
placed beside an analogion upon which rests the Icon of the Great Martyr 
Theodore the Recruit. At the completion of the Liturgy, the Priest says: 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: O come let us worship ..., Then:  
PSALM 142 
O Lord, hear my prayer; give ear unto my supplication in Thy truth; hearken 
unto me in Thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment with Thy servant, 
for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified. For the enemy hath persecuted 
my soul; he hath humbled my life down to the earth. He hath sat me in 
darkness as those that have been long dead, and my spirit within me is become 
despondent; within me my heart is troubled. I remembered days of old, I 
meditated on all Thy works, I pondered on the creations of Thy hands. I 
stretched forth my hands unto Thee; my soul thirsteth after Thee like a 
waterless land. Quickly hear me, O Lord; my spirit hath fainted away. Turn not 
Thy face away from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 
Cause me to hear Thy mercy in the morning; for in Thee have I put my hope. 
Cause me to know, O Lord, the way wherein I should walk; for unto Thee have 
I lifted up my soul. Rescue me from mine enemies, O Lord; unto Thee have I 
fled for refuge. Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. Thy good Spirit 
shall lead me in the land of uprightness; for Thy name’s sake, O Lord, shalt 
Thou quicken me. In Thy righteousness shalt Thou bring my soul out of 
affliction, and in Thy mercy shalt Thou utterly destroy mine enemies. And Thou 
shalt cut off all them that afflict my soul, for I am Thy servant.  
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Troparion to St Theodore in Tone II: 
Great are the achievements of faith! * The holy martyr Theodore rejoiced in 
the fountain of the flames * as though in the still waters of rest; * consumed in 
the fire, he was offered as a sacrifice to the Trinity. ** By his intercessions, O 
Christ God, save Thou our souls.  
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II; 
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O 
Theotokos; * for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to 
be a true Mother, having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that 
our souls be saved. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Then we read Psalm 50.  
Next we begin the Canon to St. Theodore, a composition of St. John of 
Damascus. Before the first two Troparia in each ODE we say, Holy Great 
Martyr Theodore, pray to God for us. In Tone VIII: 
ODE I  
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land, * and having 
escaped the malice of the Egyptians, * the Israelites cried aloud: * Unto 
our God and Redeemer let us sing. 
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Knowing the love for God which filled thee, O Theodore, I am in awe of 
thee: From my soul and body I dedicate to thee, these words of praise.  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
A decree was published, hateful to the Lord, that sacrifice should be offered 
to idols and not to the living God. But refusing to obey, O victorious martyr, 
thou wast thyself offered to God.  
Glory ..., Held fast by divine love, O martyr Theodore, thou didst serve as a 
soldier of the only-begotten Son of the most high God, and for thy faithful 
service thou didst did not lose thy reward.  
 Both now ..., The hosts of angels and of mortals ceaselessly praise thee, O 
unwedded Mother, for thou hast carried their Creator as a babe in thine arms.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord, thou art the confirmation of those who flee to Thee, * 
Thou art the Light of those in darkness, * and my spirit doth hymn Thee. 
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
I offer a hymn from my lips and a prayer from the affliction of my soul, for 
their sake have pity, O victorious martyr Theodore.  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Thou hast subjected thy flesh to the authority of thy mind, O glorious 
martyr, and with both of them thou didst please the Creator.  
Glory ..., Thou didst stand before the judgment-seat of the tyrant, bearing 
witness to Christ, thy King and God; refusing to offer sacrifice to false gods, O 
Theodore.  
 Both now ..., To all, and at all times, O pure Virgin, thou art a refuge and a 
rampart, and with never-silent voices we glorify thee.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Having tasted of the divine mysteries, O martyr Theodore, thou didst 
unashamedly confess our sure redemption through the birth of God.  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
They who served the passions, thought that God Himself is subject to 
passion; but enlightened by the Spirit, O victorious Theodore, thou didst show 
them to be wrong.  
Glory ..., Singing thy praises O blessed Theodore, we beseech thee, that by 
thine intercessions, we may be delivered from all distress, and from the 
passions.  
 Both now ..., Thou untilled field, bearing the life-creating Ear of wheat 
which giveth life to the world, O Theotokos, save those who sing thy praises. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Rising early we cry to Thee, O Lord; * save us, for Thou art our 
God, * and we know none other besides Thee. 
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
To the others who suffered martyrdom with thee, O martyr Theodore, thou 
didst cry out: “Love the Lord who loveth you.”  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Thy heart aflame with zeal, O victorious saint, thou didst burn up the false 
idol, together with the heathen temple.  
Glory ..., With thine invincible power, O victorious Theodore, destroy my 
passions and the insolent boldness of the enemy.  
 Both now ..., We hymn thee as a Virgin after childbirth, O Theotokos, 
having brought into the world God the Word made flesh.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior, * for many are mine iniquities; * lead 
me up from the abyss of evils I pray Thee, * for unto Thee have I 
cried, * and Thou hast hearkened unto me, * O God of my salvation.  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
How weak, how frail is the arrogance of the false gods: needing men to 
defend them, they are conquered by the fortitude of the martyrs, who proclaim 
the truth. (Twice).  
Glory ..., Made strong by the power of God, O Theodore - thou glory of the 
martyrs, thou didst perceive the torments of the wicked ones as if arrows shot 
by children O blessed one, having foreseen the eternity of the Age to come.  
 Both now ..., May we be delivered from our grievous transgressions by thy 
prayers, O pure Birthgiver of God, and may we receive the divine glory of the 
Son of God O all-pure one, Who ineffably assumed flesh from thee.  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Thou didst carry as a shield the faith of Christ within thy heart, * trampling 
underfoot the power of the enemy, O greatly-suffering martyr; * wherefore 
thou didst receive a heavenly and eternal crown O Theodore, * as one 
undefeated in battle.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: The Children of Judaea, * who of old came to dwell in Babylon, * 
trampled underfoot the flame of the furnace * through their faith in the 
Trinity, * as they sang: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Thy body was scourged, for the sake of God the Word, Who was scourged 
in the flesh for our sake; and rejoicing, O victorious martyr Theodore, with 
thanksgiving thou didst cry aloud to Him : “O God of our fathers, blessed art 
Thou.”  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Like the Redeemer, Who of His own will was sealed up, and laid in the 
tomb; thou also wast sealed up in the prison, O victorious martyr Theodore, 
and there didst cry aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Having slain the passions of the flesh, O victorious martyr, thou wast 
nourished not by food but by divine love, and didst sing: “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Glory ..., As of old, one of the undivided Trinity appeared to the Children in 
the fiery furnace, so also did He appear to thee in prison, O victorious martyr, 
strengthening thee to cry aloud, “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  

--- PAGE 18 ---
 Both now ..., Since it was Thy will, O Savior, to bestow upon us salvation, 
Thou didst take up Thy dwelling within the Virgin’s womb, and didst show her 
to be the protectress of the world; O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: In his wrath the Chaldean Tyrant made the furnace blaze, * with 
heat fanned sevenfold for the servants of God; * but when he perceived 
that they had been saved by a greater power * he cried aloud to the 
Creator and Redeemer, * “O ye Youths bless, O ye priests praise, * O ye 
people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
Blinded in his understanding, the governor of the lawless people impiously 
rebuked thee for thy faith in God: “Fool! Why dost thou vainly put thy trust in 
a man who was put to death?” But thou didst cry aloud : “O ye children bless; 
O ye priests praise; O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.”  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
As a wise and prudent steward of grace, O Theodore, with the grace given 
to thee by God thou didst cry aloud to the commander when he ordered thee to 
offer impious sacrifice, saying: “This would be a disgrace to me and all who 
sing; “O ye children bless; O ye priests praise; O ye people, supremely exalt 
Him throughout all ages..”  
Glory ..., With youthful courage, thou didst struggle, boldly accusing the 
tyrant, saying: “Why art thou so maddened as to bid me to forsake the Creator 
and falsely worship things created? But I cry aloud: “O ye children bless; O ye 
priests praise; O ye people, supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.”  
 Both now ..., By visible images, and a multitude of symbols, Moses and the 
Prophets foretold, of thy marvelous childbearing in a manner transcending 
nature O Virgin. Wherefore we joyfully, and with true faith sing thy praises, and 
supremely exalt Christ throughout all ages.  
ODE IX  
Irmos: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of 
God Most High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and 
who beyond comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given 
birth to God.  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
It was thy desire for God that brought thee to martyrdom O Theodore. Thy 
body was consumed by the material fire, and rejoicing thou didst depart to the 
divine Fire, O victorious martyr Theodore, servant of God.  
Refrain: Holy Great Martyr Theodore pray to God for us. 
All-honored saint, thou wast not destroyed by the fire, but didst thyself burn 
up the delusion of error: standing alive now in God’s presence, thou dost 
rejoice in Him with a martyr’s joy, O passion-bearer and servant of God 
Theodore.  
Glory ..., We acknowledge Thee, O Christ, to be one of the Trinity, in two 
perfect natures. By the prayers of Thy passion-bearer Theodore, save Thy 
people whom Thou hast redeemed by Thy precious blood.  
 Both now ..., Thou hast carried in thine arms the invisible God, Who is 
praised in the heavens by all the angelic powers. Through thee at all times He 
granteth us salvation in distress, wherefore we magnify thee.  
Katavasia: With never ceasing praises we magnify thee, * the Mother of 
God Most High, * who art higher than the most pure hosts, * and 
who beyond comprehension knew not wedlock, * yet hath truly given 
birth to God.  
Reader: Holy God ..., through Our Father ...,  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...  
Troparion to St Theodore in Tone II; 
Great are the achievements of faith! * The holy martyr Theodore rejoiced in 
the fountain of the flames * as though in the still waters of rest; * consumed in 
the fire, he was offered as a sacrifice to the Trinity. ** By his intercessions, O 
Christ God, save Thou our souls.  
Glory ..., Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Thou didst carry as a shield the faith of Christ within thy heart, * trampling 
underfoot the power of the enemy, O greatly-suffering martyr; * wherefore 
thou didst receive a heavenly and eternal crown O Theodore, ** as one 
undefeated in battle.  
 Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
All of us in our sinfulness * have thy fervent intercession as our protection 
and our sure defense, * O all-pure Mary, Virgin and Mother, * the salvation of 
Christians. * Cease not to intercede for us before the Savior, ** that we may 
receive forgiveness.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Then the priest blesseth the Kolyva:  
Priest: Let us pray to the Lord.  
Choir: Lord have mercy.  
Priest: O Lord, who hast brought all things to perfection through Thy word, 
and hast commanded the earth to bring forth all manner of fruits for our 
enjoyment and food; who through grain and vegetables hast made the three 
Children and Daniel fairer than the Babylonians who lived in luxury, do Thou 
Thyself, O all-loving King, bless this grain and fruit, and sanctify those who 
shall partake of them: for they have been offered by Thy servants to Thy glory, 
in honor and memory of the Holy and Great Martyr Theodore the Recruit, and 
for a memorial to those who have fallen asleep in the true Orthodox faith. 
Grant, O gracious Lord, to those who have prepared this offering and who 
keep this memorial, all their petitions that are for their salvation, and count 
them worthy to rejoice in Thine eternal blessings: by the prayers of our most 
pure Lady the Theotokos and ever-Virgin Mary, of the Holy and Great Martyr 
Theodore, whose memory we keep, and of all Thy saints. For it is Thou who 
dost bless and hallow all things, Christ our God, and to Thee we send up glory, 
with Thine eternal Father and Thy most holy, good and life-creating Spirit, 
Now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.  
Choir: Amen. Blessed be the Name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore. (Thrice) 
PSALM 33 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  

--- PAGE 21 ---
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
 

--- PAGE 22 ---
SMALL COMPLINE 
AKATHIST HYMN TO THE THEOTOKOS 
FRIDAY OF THE FIRST WEEK 
In the Greek Liturgical tradition, the Akathist Hymn, which is chanted in 
full at Matins on the Saturday of the fifth week, is also chanted preceding 
the Matins service, at four Small Compline services, with one of four 
Akathist stasis readings chanted at each service. This begins on Friday of 
the first week, and ends on Friday of the fourth week. If the Slavic 
tradition is followed. Great Compline is chanted, and the Canon to the 
Great Martyr Theodore the Recruit is chanted in place of the Canon to 
the Theotokos.  
If the Presbyter so desireth the Akathist service is chanted thus: 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: Amen. Glory to Thee our God ..., Heavenly King ..., Holy God ..., 
Our Father.  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Reader: Lord Have Mercy (12 times)..., Glory ..., Both now ..., O come let us 
worship ..., Then:  
PSALM 50 
Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me 
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine 
iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and 
done this evil before Thee, that Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and 
prevail when Thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in 
sins did my mother bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and 
secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt 
sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; 
the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my sins, 
and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy 
Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy 
governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the 
ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, 
Thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Lord, Thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if 
Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou 
shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is 
broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy good 
pleasure unto Zion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt Thou 
be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt 
offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.  
PSALM 69 
O God, be attentive unto helping me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Let 
them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned 
back and brought to shame that desire evils against me. Let them be turned 
back straightway in shame that say unto me: Well done! Well done! Let them be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all that seek after Thee, O God, and let them that love 
Thy salvation say continually: The Lord be magnified. But as for me, I am poor 
and needy; O God come unto mine aid. My helper and my deliverer art Thou, 
O Lord; make no long tarrying.  
PSALM 142 
O Lord, hear my prayer; give ear unto my supplication in Thy truth; hearken 
unto me in Thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment with Thy servant, 
for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified. For the enemy hath persecuted 
my soul; he hath humbled my life down to the earth. He hath sat me in 
darkness as those that have been long dead, and my spirit within me is become 
despondent; within me my heart is troubled. I remembered days of old, I 
meditated on all Thy works, I pondered on the creations of Thy hands. I 
stretched forth my hands unto Thee; my soul thirsteth after Thee like a 
waterless land. Quickly hear me, O Lord; my spirit hath fainted away. Turn not 
Thy face away from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 
Cause me to hear Thy mercy in the morning; for in Thee have I put my hope. 
Cause me to know, O Lord, the way wherein I should walk; for unto Thee have 
I lifted up my soul. Rescue me from mine enemies, O Lord; unto Thee have I 
fled for refuge. Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. Thy good Spirit 
shall lead me in the land of uprightness; for Thy name’s sake, O Lord, shalt 
Thou quicken me. In Thy righteousness shalt Thou bring my soul out of 
affliction, and in Thy mercy shalt Thou utterly destroy mine enemies. And Thou 
shalt cut off all them that afflict my soul, for I am Thy servant.  
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
THE DOXOLOGY 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace and good will among men. 
We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we give 
thanks to Thee for Thy great glory. O Lord, heavenly King, God the Father 
Almighty; O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ; and O Holy Spirit. O 
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that takest away the sin of the 
world; have mercy on us; Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive 
our prayer; Thou that sittest at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us. 
For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord, O Jesus Christ, to the glory of 
God the Father. Amen. Every night will I bless Thee, and I will praise Thy 
Name forever, yea, forever and forever. Lord, thou hast been our refuge in 
generation and generation. I said: O Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul, for 
I have sinned against Thee. O Lord, unto Thee have I fled for refuge, teach me 
to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. For in Thee is the fountain of life, in Thy 
light shall we see light. O continue Thy mercy unto them that know Thee. 
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this night without sin. Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord, the God of our Fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the 
ages. Amen. Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped 
in Thee. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me Thy statutes. Blessed art Thou, O 
Master, give me understanding of Thy statutes. Blessed art Thou, O Holy One, 
enlighten me by Thy statutes. O Lord, Thy mercy endureth forever; disdain not 
the works of Thy hands. To Thee is due praise, to Thee is due a song, to Thee 
glory is due, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, Now and 
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
THE SYMBOL OF FAITH 
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and 
of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
the Only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true 
God of true God; begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by 
Whom all things were made; Who for us men and for our salvation came down 
from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, 
and became man; And was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered 
and was buried; And arose again on the third day according to the Scriptures; 
And ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; And 
shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living and the dead; Whose 
kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life; 
Who proceedeth from the Father; Who with the Father and the Son together is 

--- PAGE 25 ---
worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. In One, Holy, Catholic, 
and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins. I look 
for the resurrection of the dead, And the life of the age to come. Amen.  
Then immediately:  
It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, ever blessed and most 
blameless, and Mother of our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and 
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, who without corruption 
gavest birth to God the Word, the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
After which we chant the first stasis of the Akathist Hymn: 
Canon to the Most Holy Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Beholding thee, the living book of Christ, sealed by the Spirit, the great 
archangel exclaimed to thee, O pure one: Rejoice, vessel of joy, through which 
the curse of the first mother is annulled.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, Virgin bride of God, restoration of Adam and the death of Hades. 
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, palace of the King of all. Rejoice, fiery throne of 
the Almighty.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, O thou who alone hast blossomed forth the unfading Rose. 
Rejoice, for thou hast borne the fragrant Apple. Rejoice, Maiden unwedded, the 
pure fragrance of the only King, and preservation of the world.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, treasure-house of purity, by which we have risen from our fall. 
Rejoice, sweet-smelling lily which perfumeth the faithful, fragrant incense and 
most precious myrrh.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  

--- PAGE 26 ---
From thee, the untilled field, hath grown the divine Ear of grain. Rejoice, 
living table that hath held the Bread of Life. Rejoice, O Lady, never-failing 
spring of the Living Water.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
O Heifer that bearest the unblemished Calf for the faithful, rejoice!, Ewe 
that hast brought forth the lamb of God, Who taketh away the sins of all the 
world. Rejoice, ardent mercy-seat.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice brightest dawn, who alone bearest Christ the Sun. Rejoice, dwelling-
place of Light, who hast dispersed darkness and utterly driven away the gloomy 
demons.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, only portal through which the Word alone hath passed. By thy 
birthgiving, O Lady, thou hast broken the bars and gates of Hades. Rejoice, 
Bride of God, divine entry of the saved.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus 
the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he 
hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
With voices of song in faith we cry aloud to thee, who art worthy of all 
praise: Rejoice, butter mountain, mountain curdled by the Spirit. Rejoice, 
candlestick and vessel of manna, which sweeteneth the senses of all the pious.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, mercy-seat of the world, most pure Lady. Rejoice, ladder raising all 
from the earth by grace. Rejoice, bridge that in very truth hast led from death to 
life all those who hymn thee.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, higher than the heavens, who didst painlessly carry 
within thy womb the Fountain of the earth. Rejoice, sea-shell that with thy 
blood didst dye a divine purple robe for the King of Hosts.  
 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, Lady who in truth didst give birth to the lawgiver, Who freely 
washed clean the iniquities of all. O Maiden who hast not known wedlock, 
unfathomable depth, unutterable height, by whom we have been deified.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Praising thee who hast woven for the world a Crown not made by the hand 
of man, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, the guardian of all mankind, fortress 
and rampart, and sacred refuge.  
ODE V 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God 
of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all 
who hymn thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, who hast given birth to the Way of life, and 
who didst save the world from the flood of sin. Rejoice, Bride of God, tidings 
fearful to tell and hear. Rejoice, dwelling-place of the Master of all creation.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, the strength and fortress of all, sanctuary of glory, 
the death of Hades, most radiant bridal chamber. Rejoice, joy of angels. Rejoice, 
helper of those who pray to thee with faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Lady, fiery chariot of the Word, living paradise, having in thy 
midst the Tree of Life, the Lord of Life, Whose sweetness vivifieth all who 
partake of Him with faith, though they have been subject to corruption.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Strengthened by thy might, we raise our cry to thee with faith: Rejoice, city 
of the King of all, of which things glorious and worthy to be heard were clearly 
spoken. Rejoice, unhewn mountain, unfathomed depth.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, all-pure one, spacious tabernacle of the Word, shell which 
produced the divine Pearl. Rejoice, all-wondrous Theotokos, who dost reconcile 
with God all who ever call thee blessed.  
 

--- PAGE 28 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * 
O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
O undefiled bridal chamber of the Word, cause of deification for all, rejoice, 
all-honorable preaching of the prophet; rejoice, adornment of the apostles.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee hath come the Dew that extinguished the flame of idolatry; 
therefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, living fleece wet with dew, which Gideon saw 
of old, O Virgin.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Behold, to thee, O Virgin, we cry: Rejoice! Be thou the port and a haven for 
all that sail upon the troubled waters of affliction, amidst all the snares of the 
enemy.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Thou cause of joy, endue our thoughts with grace, that we may cry to thee: 
Rejoice, unconsumed bush, cloud of light that unceasingly overshadoweth the 
faithful.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We sing of thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, chariot of the noetic Sun; true vine, 
that hast produced ripe grapes, from which floweth a wine making glad the 
souls of those who glorify thee in faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Bride of God, who hast given birth to the Healer of all; thou 
mystical staff, that didst blossom with the unfading Flower. Rejoice, O Lady, 
through whom we are filled with joy and inherited life.  
 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
No tongue, however eloquent, hath power to sing thy praises, O Lady; for 
thou art exalted above the seraphim, having given birth to Christ the King, 
Whom do thou beseech to deliver from all harm those that venerate thee in 
faith.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
The ends of the earth praise thee and call thee blessed, and they cry to thee 
with love: Rejoice, pure scroll, upon which the Word was written by the finger 
of the Father. Do thou beseech Him to inscribe thy servants in the book of life, 
O Theotokos.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
We thy servants pray to thee and bend the knees of our hearts: Incline thine 
ear, O pure one; save thy servants who are always sinking, and preserve thy city 
from every enemy captivity, O Theotokos.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Within thy womb thou hast received the Word; thou hast carried Him who 
carrieth all; O pure one, thou hast fed with milk Him Who by His beck feedeth 
the whole world. To Him we sing: Sing to the Lord, all ye His works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Moses perceived in the burning bush the great mystery of thy childbearing, 
while the youths clearly prefigured it as they stood in the midst of the fire and 
were not consumed, O Virgin pure and inviolate. Therefore do we hymn thee 
and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We who once through falsehood were stripped naked, have been clothed in 
the robe of incorruption by thy childbearing; and we who once sat in the 
darkness of sin have seen the light, O Maiden, dwelling-place of Light. 
Therefore we hymn thee, and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
 

--- PAGE 30 ---
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Through thee the dead are brought to life, for thou hast borne the 
Hypostatic Life. They who once were mute are now made to speak well; lepers 
are cleansed, diseases are driven out, the hosts of the spirits of the air are 
conquered, O Virgin, the salvation of mankind.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Thou didst bear the salvation of the world, O pure one, and through thee 
we were raised from earth to heaven. Rejoice, all-blessed, protection and 
strength, rampart and fortress of those who sing: O all ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the 
holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us, the faithful, call to thee: Rejoice! Through thee, O Maiden, we have 
become partakers of everlasting joy. Save us from temptations, from barbarian 
captivity, and from every other injury that befalleth the sinful because of the 
multitude of their transgressions.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Thou hast appeared as our enlightenment and confirmation; wherefore, we 
cry to thee: Rejoice, never-setting star that hast brought the great Sun into the 
world. Rejoice, pure Virgin who hast opened the closed Eden. Rejoice, pillar of 
fire, leading mankind to a higher life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us stand with reverence in the house of our God, and let us cry aloud: 
Rejoice, Sovereign Lady of the world. Rejoice, Mary, Sovereign Lady of us all. 
Rejoice, thou who alone art immaculate and fair among women. Rejoice, vessel 
that receivedst the inexhaustible myrrh poured out upon thee.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Thou dove that hast borne the Merciful One, rejoice, ever-virgin! Rejoice, 
glory of all the saints. Rejoice, crown of martyrs. Rejoice, divine adornment of 
all the righteous and salvation of us the faithful.  
 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Spare Thine inheritance, O God, and overlook all our sins now, for as an 
intercessor in Thy sight, O Christ, Thou hast her who on earth gave birth to 
Thee without seed, when in Thy great mercy Thou didst will to take the form of 
a man.  
Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion: in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: * Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
(After this, is sung the stasis which corresponds to the week of Great Lent) 
The First Stasis  
IKOS I 
An archangel was sent from Heaven to say to the Theotokos: Rejoice! 
(Thrice) And beholding Thee, O Lord, taking bodily form, he was amazed and 
with his bodiless voice he stood crying to Her such things as these:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom joy will shine forth:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom the curse will cease!  
Rejoice; Recall of fallen Adam:  
Rejoice; Redemption of the tears of Eve!  
Rejoice; Height inaccessible to human thoughts:  
Rejoice; Depth undiscernible even for the eyes of angels!  
Rejoice; For Thou art the throne of the King:  
Rejoice; For Thou bearest Him Who beareth all!  
Rejoice; Star that causest the Sun to appear:  
Rejoice; Womb of the Divine Incarnation!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom creation is renewed:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom we worship the Creator!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION II  
Seeing herself to be chaste, the holy one said boldly to Gabriel: The marvel 
of thy speech is difficult for my soul to accept. How canst thou speak of a birth 
from a seedless conception? And She cried: Alleluia!  

--- PAGE 32 ---
IKOS II 
Seeking to know knowledge that cannot be known, the Virgin cried to the 
ministering one: Tell me, how can a son be born from a chaste womb? Then he 
spake to Her in fear, only crying aloud thus:  
Rejoice; Initiate of God’s ineffable will:  
Rejoice; Assurance of those who pray in silence!  
Rejoice; Beginning of Christ’s miracles:  
Rejoice; Crown of His dogmas!  
Rejoice; Heavenly ladder by which God came down:  
Rejoice; Bridge that conveyest us from earth to Heaven!  
Rejoice; Wonder of angels sounded abroad:  
Rejoice; Wound of demons bewailed afar!  
Rejoice; Thou Who ineffably gavest birth to the Light:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst reveal Thy secret to none!  
Rejoice; Thou Who surpassest the knowledge of the wise:  
Rejoice; Thou Who givest light to the minds of the faithful!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION III 
The power of the Most High then overshadowed the Virgin for conception, 
and showed Her fruitful womb as a sweet meadow to all who wish to reap 
salvation, as they sing: Alleluia!  
IKOS III 
Having received God into Her womb, the Virgin hastened to Elizabeth 
whose unborn babe at once recognized Her embrace, rejoiced, and with leaps 
of joy as songs, cried to the Theotokos:  
Rejoice; Branch of an Unfading Sprout:  
Rejoice; Acquisition of Immortal Fruit!  
Rejoice; Laborer that laborest for the Lover of mankind:  
Rejoice; Thou Who givest birth to the Planter of our life!  
Rejoice; Corn-land yielding a rich crop of mercies:  
Rejoice; Table bearing a wealth of forgiveness!  
Rejoice; Thou Who makest to bloom the garden of delight:  
Rejoice; Thou Who preparest a haven for souls!  
Rejoice; Acceptable incense of intercession:  

--- PAGE 33 ---
Rejoice; Propitiation of all the world!  
Rejoice; Good will of God to mortals:  
Rejoice; Boldness of mortals before God!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION IV  
Having within a tempest of doubting thoughts, the chaste Joseph was 
troubled. For knowing Thee to have no husband, he suspected a secret union, 
O blameless one. But having learned that Thy conception was of the Holy 
Spirit, he said: Alleluia!  
Then the Choir chanteth the first Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: Rejoice, Thou Bride Unwedded!  
Reader: Holy God ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Then the Kontakion of St. Theodore Tyron, in Tone VIII: 
Thou didst carry as a shield the faith of Christ within thy heart, * trampling 
underfoot the power of the enemy, O greatly-suffering martyr; * wherefore 
thou didst receive a heavenly and eternal crown O Theodore, * as one 
undefeated in battle.  
Reader: Lord, have mercy (40 times).  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners, Who callest all to salvation through the promise of good things to 
come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy 
commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our 
thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. 
Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided by their array, 
we may attain to the unity of the faith and the knowledge of Thine 
unapproachable glory; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Reader: Lord have mercy. (Thrice), Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  

--- PAGE 34 ---
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father (Master) bless! 
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our 
God, have mercy on us. 
Reader: Amen, Lord have mercy (12 Times), Save, help, and protect us, O 
Virgin Theotokos. 
The Supplicatory Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos: 
O undefiled, untainted, uncorrupted, most pure, chaste Virgin, Thou Bride 
of God and Sovereign Lady, who didst unite the Word of God to mankind 
through thy most glorious birth giving, and hast linked the apostate nature of 
our race with the heavenly; O Thou who art the only hope of the hopeless, and 
the helper of the struggling, the ever-ready protection of them that hasten unto 
thee, and the refuge of all Orthodox Christians: Shrink not with loathing from 
me a sinner, defiled as I am, and who with polluted thoughts, words, and deeds 
have made myself utterly unprofitable, and through slothfulness of mind have 
become a slave to the pleasures of life. But do thou as the Mother of God Who 
lovest mankind, show thy love for mankind and mercifully have compassion 
upon me a sinner and prodigal, and accept my supplication, which is offered 
unto thee out of my defiled mouth; and making use of thy motherly boldness, 
entreat thy Son and our Master and Lord that He may be pleased to open for 
me the bowels of His tender compassion and graciousness to mankind, and, 
disregarding my numberless offenses, may He turn me back to repentance, and 
show me to be a tried worker of His precepts. And be thou ever present unto 
me as merciful, compassionate and well disposed; in the present life be thou a 
fervent intercessor and helper, repelling the assaults of adversaries and guiding 
me to salvation, and at the time of my departure taking care of my miserable 
soul, and driving far away from it the dark countenances of evil demons; lastly, 
at the dreadful day of judgment delivering me from eternal torment, show me 
to be an heir of the ineffable glory of thy Son and our God; all of which may I 
attain, O my Sovereign Lady, most holy Theotokos, by virtue of thine 
intercessions and protection, through the grace and love to mankind of thine 
only begotten Son, our Lord and God and Savior, Jesus Christ, to Whom is due 
all glory, honor and worship, together with His beginningless Father, and His 
Most Holy and good and life creating Spirit, Now and ever, and unto ages of 
ages. Amen.  
A Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, by Antiochus the monk: 
And grant unto us, O Master, in the coming sleep, rest for body and soul, 
and preserve us from the gloomy slumber of sin, and from every dark and 
nocturnal sensuality. Subdue the impulses of passions, extinguish the fiery darts 

--- PAGE 35 ---
of the evil one that are cunningly hurled against us, assuage the rebellions of our 
flesh, and every earthly and fleshly subtlety of ours lull to sleep. And grant unto 
us, O God, a watchful mind, chaste thought, a sober heart, a sleep gentle and 
free from every satanic illusion. Raise us up at the time of prayer firmly 
grounded in Thy judgments. All the night long grant us a doxology, that we may 
hymn and bless and glorify Thy most honorable and majestic name: of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Now and ever, and unto the ages 
of ages. Amen.  
Most glorious, Ever-Virgin, Mother of Christ God, present our prayer to 
thy Son and our God, that through thee, He may save our souls. 
My hope is the Father, my refuge is the Son, my protection is the Holy 
Spirit: O Holy Trinity, glory to Thee. 
All my hope I place in thee, O Mother of God: keep me under thy 
protection. 
In Thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice, the ranks of Angels and 
the race of mankind; O all-hallowed Temple and spiritual Paradise, boast of 
Virgins. For from thee God became incarnate and He who is our God before 
the ages became a child. He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it 
wider than the heavens. In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; glory 
be to thee. 
A Prayer to the Guardian Angel: 
O holy angel that standeth by my wretched soul and my passionate life, 
forsake not me a sinner, nor shrink from me because of mine intemperance. 
Give no place for the cunning demon to master me through the violence of my 
mortal body, strengthen my poor and feeble hand, and guide me in the way of 
salvation. Yea, O holy angel of God, guardian and protector of my wretched 
soul and body, forgive me all wherein I have offended thee all the days of my 
life; and if I have sinned in anything this day, protect me during this present 
night, and guard me from every temptation of the enemy, that I may not anger 
God by any sin. And pray to the Lord for me, that he may establish me in His 
fear, and show me, His servant, to be worthy of His goodness. Amen. 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Then the Gospel is read thus:  

--- PAGE 36 ---
Priest: And that He will vouchsafe unto us the hearing of the holy Gospel, 
let us pray unto the Lord God:  
Choir: Lord, have mercy (Thrice).  
Priest: Wisdom! Aright! Let us hear the holy Gospel. Peace be unto all.  
Choir: And to thy spirit.  
Priest: The reading is from the holy Gospel, according to Saint John.  
Choir: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee.  
Priest: Let us attend.  
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (15:1-7)  
The Lord said unto His disciples: I am the true vine, and my Father is the 
husbandman. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and 
every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. 
Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in 
me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the 
vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: 
He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for 
without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a 
branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and 
they are burned. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what 
ye will, and it shall be done unto you.  
Choir: Glory to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee.  
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory to Thee. 
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Lord, have mercy. (Thrice), father, bless. 
Priest: May Christ our true God, by the prayers of His most pure Mother, of 
our holy and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and 
save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind. 
Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Bless, holy fathers (mothers, brothers and sisters) and forgive me a 
sinner, all wherein I have sinned this day in deed, word, and thought, and by all 
my senses.  
And the brethren (sisters/congregation) reply: 
May God forgive and have mercy on thee, holy father. 
And they make a prostration, asking this forgiveness: 
Bless me, holy father, and forgive all wherein I have sinned this day in deed, 
word, and thought, and by all my senses, and pray for me a sinner. 

--- PAGE 37 ---
Priest: Through His grace may God forgive and have mercy on us all. 
Choir: Amen. 
And the Priest saith this Ektinia: 
Priest: Let us pray for the Orthodox episcopate of the (Jurisdiction) Church; 
for our lord the Very Most Reverend (Patriarch/Metropolitan/Archbishop) 
(Name), First Hierarch of the (Jurisdiction) Church; for our lord the Most 
Reverend (Metropolitan/Archbishop/Bishop N., whose diocese it is) and all 
our brethren in Christ. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (Repeated slowly and with compunction) 
Priest: For the suffering Russian land and its Orthodox people both in the 
homeland and in the diaspora, and for their salvation; for this land, its 
authorities and armed forces, and for every Christian land. 
Priest: For them that hate us and them that love us. 
Priest: For them that are kind to us and them that serve us. 
Priest: For them that have asked us unworthy ones to pray for them. 
Priest: For the deliverance of the imprisoned. 
Priest: For our fathers and brethren that have passed on before us. 
Priest: For those sailing upon the sea. 
Priest: For those bedridden in infirmities. 
Priest: Let us pray for the abundance of the fruits of the earth. 
Priest: And for every Orthodox Christian soul. 
Priest: Let us bless pious kings (rulers), Orthodox hierarchs, and the 
founders of this holy habitation. 
Priest: For Our parents, and all that have passed on before us, our fathers, 
brethren, and the for the Orthodox here and everywhere laid to rest. 
Priest: Let us say also for ourselves. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (Thrice) 
Then the following Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy 
purity, * Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of 
praise can I offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? I am in doubt and 
stand in awe. * Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of 
Grace.  

--- PAGE 38 ---
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our 
God, have mercy on us. 
Choir: Amen. 
