--- PAGE 1 ---
THE FIRST SUNDAY IN LENT  
THE SUNDAY OF THE TRIUMPH OF ORTHODOXY  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera:  
Six Resurrection Stichera in the Tone of Week: 
And 4 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone VI:  
Inspired by Thy Spirit, O Lord * the prophets foretold that Thou, Whom 
nothing can contain, * and Who hast shone forth in eternity before the morning 
star * from the immaterial and bodiless womb of the Father, * wast to become a 
child, taking flesh from the Virgin, * being joined to mankind and seen by those 
on earth. * Through them O Compassionate One * count as worthy of Thy light, 
* those who ceaselessly sing ** the praises of Thine ineffable and holy 
Resurrection.  
Having preached Thee in word, * the divinely-inspired prophets, honoring 
Thee in works, * received as their reward unending life. * For they refused, O 
Master, * to worship the creation instead of Thee, the Creator, * renouncing the 
whole world * for the sake of the Gospel, * they were conformed in their 
suffering, to Thy Passion * which they had foretold. * By their intercessions, 
count us worthy * to pass without offense through the period of the Fast, ** for 
Thou alone art plenteous in mercy.  
Thou Who art uncircumscribed in Thy divine nature, * wast pleased in the 
last times O Lord, to take flesh and become circumscribed; * and in assuming 
flesh, * Thou hast also taken upon Thyself all its distinctive characteristics. * 
Therefore we depict the likeness of Thy countenance, * venerating it with honor, 
* we are exalted to the love of Thee, * and from it we receive the grace of 
healing, ** thus following the holy traditions of the apostles.  
As a precious adornment * the Church of Christ hath received the venerable 
and holy icons * of the Savior Christ, * of the Mother of God, and of all the 
saints. * Celebrating now their triumphant restoration, * she is made bright and 
splendid with grace, * rejecting and driving away indolent imaginings of the 
heretics, * with great rejoicing she giveth glory unto God the Lover of mankind, 
** Who for her sake endured His voluntary Passion.  
Glory ..., from the Triodion, in Tone II:  
The grace of truth hath shone forth upon us; * the mysteries darkly 
prefigured in times past have now been openly fulfilled. * For behold, the 
Church is clothed in the unsurpassed beauty * of the icons of the incarnate 
Christ * which was foreshadowed by the ark of testimony. * This is the 
upholding of the Orthodox faith; * for if we uphold the icon of the Savior, 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Whom we worship, * we shall not go astray. * Let all those who do not confess 
this faith be covered with shame; * but we shall glory in venerating the icon of 
the Word made flesh, * which we worship not as an idol. * So let us kiss it, and 
with all the faithful cry aloud: ** O God, save Thy people and bless Thine 
inheritance.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
Then “O Joyous Light ...”: 
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
The Resurrection Aposticha, in the Tone of the week, then: 
Glory from the Triodion..., in Tone II:  
Advancing from ungodliness to honorable faith, * and illumined with the 
light of knowledge, * let us clap our hands and with psalmody, * offer praise and 
thanksgiving unto God; * and with honor let us venerate the holy icons of Christ, 
* of the most pure Virgin and all the saints, * whether depicted on walls, on 
wooden panels or on holy vessels, * rejecting the impious faith of the heterodox. 
* For, as Basil says, the honor given the icon * passeth through to the prototype 
represented by it. * By the prayers of Thine all-immaculate Mother, O Christ 
God * and of all the saints, ** we beseech Thee, to bestow upon us Thy great 
mercy.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever 
known a mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her 
arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * 
O most pure one, who carried Him as an infant in Thine embrace * and before 
Whom thou hast a mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those 
who honor thee, ** that He have compassion and save our souls. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, * 
for thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Twice) 
Troparion of the Sunday of Orthodoxy in Tone II:  
We venerate Thine immaculate icon, O good One, * asking the pardon of our 
transgressions, O Christ God. * For of Thine own will Thou wast well-pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from the slavery to 
the enemy those Whom Thou hast fashioned. * Therefore in thanksgiving we cry 
to Thee: * Thou didst fill all things with joy, O our Savior, ** when Thou camest 
to save the world. (Once) 
Blessed be the Name of the Lord, and the rest. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, in the Tone of the 
week: (Twice) 
Glory ..., the Troparion of the Sunday of Orthodoxy, in Tone II:  
We venerate Thine immaculate icon, O good One, * asking the pardon of our 
transgressions, O Christ God. * For of Thine own will Thou wast well-pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from the slavery to 
the enemy those Whom Thou hast fashioned. * Therefore in thanksgiving we cry 
to Thee: * Thou didst fill all things with joy, O our Savior, ** when Thou camest 
to save the world.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
All of thy most glorious mysteries are beyond comprehension, * O 
Theotokos; * for, thy purity sealed and thy virginity intact, * thou art known to 
be a true Mother, having given birth unto God. ** Him do thou entreat, that our 
souls be saved. 
After the 1st and 2nd readings from the Psalter, The Sessional Hymns of 
the Resurrection, in the Tone of the week:  
Then the Resurrectional Verses: (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes; and the rest. 
Then the small Litany and the Sessional Hymn, in the Tone of the week. 
The Hymns of Ascent, and Prokeimenon, in the Tone of the week: Let 
every breath ..., The Sunday Resurrection Gospel.  
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ..., 
Psalm 50. Then the following Hymns of compunction, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., The gates of repentance, do Thou open unto me, O Giver of Life, 
* for early in the morning my spirit seeketh Thy holy temple, * bearing the 
temple of my body all defiled. * But as One who art compassionate * cleanse it 
by Thy loving-kindness and mercy.  
 Both now ..., Guide me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos: * for I 
have polluted my soul with shameful deeds * and wasted all my life in 
slothfulness. * but by thine intercessions * do thou deliver me from all impurity.  
In Tone VI:  
Have mercy upon me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy: * and 
according to the multitude of Thy compassion * blot out my transgressions.  
In Tone VIII: As I the wretched one ponder the multitude of evil deeds I 
have done, * I tremble for fear of the dread day of judgment. * But trusting in 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thy compassionate mercy, * like David do I cry unto Thee: * “Have mercy upon 
me, O God, according to Thy great mercy.”  
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” and the canons: 
ODE I 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Through the deep of the Red Sea ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Leaping up with joy, let us the faithful cry aloud today: How marvelous are 
Thy works, O Christ! How great is Thy might! For Thou hast made us of one 
mind and brought about concord.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
O Godly-wise people, come let us celebrate a day of joy; for heaven and earth 
now rejoiceth, with all the hosts of angels and all mankind, each making festival.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
 Seeing this great blessing we have received, let us clap our hands; for the 
divided members of Christ have been brought together, and we give praise to 
God Who hath bestowed peace.  
Glory ..., Today a festival of victory hath been granted to the Church, 
through the divinely-inspired intent and council of Michael and Theodora, who 
piously uphold the faith of our Sovereigns.  
Both now ..., The swords of impious heresies have failed: For in deep 
reverence, O all-immaculate pure One, gazing now upon thy temple, beauteously 
adorned with icons, we rejoice with a most holy joy.  
Katavasia: Through the deep of the Red Sea, * marched dry shod Israel of 
old, * and by Moses’ outstretched hands, * raised in the form of a cross, * 
the power of Amalek was routed in the wilderness. 
ODE III 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Thy Church, O Christ ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
No longer now are the impious heretics exalted in their pride: For the power 
of God hath firmly established Orthodoxy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Let the prophets sprinkle upon us today the life-giving dew from heaven, at 
the restoration of the faith 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
In Godly harmony, let the mystical trumpets of Christ’s apostles sound forth, 
proclaiming the re-establishment of the precious icons.  
Glory ..., Let us sing in praise of Christ, Who hath appointed a devout and 
pious Empress to rule over us, together with her heir, crowned by God.  
Both now ..., Shine now upon the faithful who have gathered in thy holy 
house, O most pure One, the light of grace, we pray thee. 
Katavasia: Thy Church, O Christ, rejoiceth in Thee crying aloud: * Thou, 
O Lord, art my strength, * my refuge and foundation. 
Sessional Hymn from the Triodion, in Tone I:  
Depicting Thy divine form in icons, O Christ, * we openly proclaim Thy 
birth, * Thine ineffable miracles and Thy voluntary Crucifixion. * From whence 
devils are driven out in fear ** and their fellow-workers - the heretics, lament in 
shame.  
Glory ..., The divine and beauteous images of the prophets, * of the apostles 
the holy martyrs, and of all the saints * are rendered in holy icons; * in which 
Thou, the unwedded Bride, * art also rendered beauteously with noetic splendor, 
* O Mother of Zion on high.  
Both now ..., With love, O honored Virgin, we venerate thy holy icon; with 
one accord we proclaim thee to be the true Mother of God, and in faith we bow 
down before thee. Since thou hast power to do all things, be our guardian and 
our strong protection, and drive far from us every tribulation.  
ODE IV 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Seeing Thee, the Sun of righteousness ... 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Through the divine descent of the Comforter sanctify Thy temple, and by 
His coming banish the delusion of heresy, O plenteously merciful Word of God.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Deliver Thy people from the aggression of the impious, and enkindle within 
them a zeal for piety, as they cry aloud to Thee in faith: Glory to Thy power, O 
Lord.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Seeing the churches of God radiant with the sacred depictions and images of 
Christ and the Theotokos, we rejoice with a holy joy.  
Glory ..., Adorned with her royal crown, the Empress, out of a true love for 
the Kingdom of Christ, hath restored in all the churches His most pure icon and 
the images of the saints.  
Both now ..., Thou didst bear the Divine Word incarnate, O divinely glorious 
One, revealed as one full of grace, wherefore we consecrate thy bright and 
splendid temple. 
Katavasia: Beholding Thee, the Sun of righteousness, * lifted up upon 
the cross, * the Church now standeth arrayed and doth worthily cry 
aloud: * Glory be to Thy power, O Lord! 
ODE V 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Firmly establish Thy church, O Lord, that unto the ages of ages she may 
stand unshaken by the tempest of heresy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
O Thou Who alone art good and the source of goodness, raise up the horn 
of the Orthodox who honor Thine image.  
Glory ..., The never-setting light of piety hath shone forth upon us, by the 
divinely-inspired commandment of our faithful pastors.  
Both now ..., Renew for us the ancient splendors, O most pure Mother of 
God, and sanctify this thy dwelling with thy grace.  
Katavasia: Thou, O Lord, who camest into the world, * art my light, * a 
holy light turning from the darkness of ignorance * those who sing Thy 
praises in faith. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
ODE VI 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: The church crieth out unto Thee ... 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
The Master’s countenance is depicted, honored with faith, and venerated; 
whereby the Church regaineth her boldness before God, reverently glorifying the 
Savior.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
The Church of Christ hath been delivered from the darkness of heresy: 
putting on a robe of gladness, she is clothed in the light of divine grace.  
Glory ..., The Orthodox people have regained the light and glory which it had 
of old, through the decree of the Empress Theodora and her pious son the 
Emperor Michael.  
Both now ..., He Who of old commanded Moses to make the ark of the 
covenant, came to dwell within thee, as if in a noetic ark: He alone is supremely 
glorified, making thy temple glorious with miracles.  
 Katavasia: The church crieth out unto Thee O Lord, * “I will sacrifice 
unto Thee with a voice of praise” * having been cleansed of the blood of 
the demons’ * by the blood that for mercy’s sake flowed from Thy side. 
Kontakion from the Triodion, in Tone VIII:  
The uncircumscribed Word of the Father hath become circumscribed, * 
taking flesh from thee, O Theotokos, * and He hath restored the sullied image to 
its ancient glory, filling it with divine beauty. ** This our salvation we confess in 
deed and word, and we depict it in the holy icons.  
Ikos: Enlightened by this mystery of God’s providence, the divinely-inspired 
prophets foretold it of old; and this they did for our sakes, who see the 
fulfillment of the ages. Receiving through this mystery divine knowledge, we 
know one Lord and God, glorified in three Hypostases, and Him alone do we 
worship; we have one faith, one baptism, and clothed in Christ, we confess in 
deed and word our salvation, depicting it in the holy icons.  
SYNAXARION 
Verse: I rejoice when I see the veneration due the icons, 
Verse: Once so ignominiously rejected. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
On this first Sunday of Great Lent, the Sunday of Orthodoxy, the Church of 
Christ celebrates the restoration of the holy and venerable icons by the Emperor 
Michael, the holy and blessed Empress Theodora and the Holy Methodius, 
Patriarch of Constantinople. Through God’s indulgence Leo the Isaurian, a 
swineherd and keeper of donkeys, inherited the scepter of the kingdom. At that 
time Saint Germanus was at the helm of the Church. Leo sent for him and said, 
“since it seems to me that there is no difference between the holy icons and 
idols, command that they be removed immediately from among us. Although if 
they are true likenesses of the saints, let them be hung higher on the walls so that 
we who are wallowing in sins do not defile them by venerating them.” But the 
Patriarch responded thus to the Emperor’s abomination, “O King, we have 
heard of someone who once raised his hand against the holy icons. He was called 
Conon. Could you be this man?” The emperor said, “I was so called as a child.” 
And since the Patriarch refused to obey the emperor, he deposed him and 
installed Anastasius, who sympathized with him. And so at that time began the 
struggle against the holy icons. After this Leo Constantine Copronymus became 
heir to the kingdom as well as to the savage attacks against the holy icons. And 
what can be said about the number and kind of deeds that lawless man 
committed except that he came to a most shameful end. His son, whose mother 
was a Khazar, inherited the kingdom after him, and he also came to a bad end. 
Irene and Constantine then ascended the throne. At the direction of the holy 
Patriarch Tarasius they assembled the Seventh Council, and the holy icons were 
once more accepted by Christ’s Church. After they relinquished the kingdom, 
Nicephorus ascended to the throne. After him there were Stauracius and then 
Michael Rhangabe, who were both iconoclasts. The beast-like Leo the Armenian 
seized the throne from Michael, and, having been misled by an impious hermit, 
began the second iconoclasm. And once more the Church was bereft of Her 
beauty. Michael Amorius succeeded him, whose son Theophilus then for the 
second time directed this madness against the icons. For it was this Theophilus 
who gave many of the Holy Fathers over to torments and tortures, seeking the 
truth about the holy icons and believing whatever he would. “If there be anyone 
in the city intent on uprising, then he will be caught not long after I am told.” 
And after reigning for 12 years, he was stricken with an intestinal disorder so that 
he desired to relinquish his life. His mouth opened so wide, that his internal 
organs were visible. The empress was so upset at what had happened, that she 
could barely sleep. And in a dream she beheld the most pure Theotokos holding 
the pre-eternal Child, surrounded by most luminous angels. They were striking 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Theophilus her husband and humiliating him. Now when her dream had passed 
and Theophilus had come to his senses, he cried, “Woe is me in my 
wretchedness, I am struck for the sake of the holy icons.” And immediately the 
empress held an icon of the Theotokos above him and entreated her with tears. 
And Theophilus, so inclined, saw that one of the clergy surrounding him had an 
engolpion, which he grabbed and kissed. Now as soon as his lips touched the 
icon, and he opened wide his mouth, he returned to normal and was relived of 
the adversity and affliction and fell asleep, after confessing that it is good to 
venerate the holy icons. Then the empress, fetching the holy and precious images 
from her bedchamber, convinced Theophilus to kiss them and venerate them 
with all his heart. A short while afterwards Theophilus departed this life. 
Theodora then commanded that all who were in exile and in prison be freed. 
John was deposed from the patriarchal throne, since he was more a sorcerer and 
demon worshiper than patriarch. Then Methodius, a confessor of Christ, 
ascended the throne, having suffered much through having been closed up in a 
tomb alive. While he was there, Ioannicius the Great, who was practicing 
asceticism on Mount Olympus, received a divine visitation. The great faster 
Arsaacius came to him and said, “God has sent me to you, that we might go to 
the righteous Isaiah the recluse in Nicomedia and learn from him what God 
desires and what is fitting for His Church.” Now when they came to the 
venerable Isaiah, he said to them, “Thus saith the Lord: Behold, the end is 
approaching for the enemies of My image. Go to the empress Theodora and to 
the Patriarch Methodius and tell them: “Cease to do what is not holy, and offer 
sacrifice to Me with the angels by venerating the countenance of My image and 
of the Cross.”” Hearing this they immediately left for Constantinople and 
announced what had been said to Patriarch Methodius and all God’s assembled 
people. The assembly then went to the empress and found her agreeable in all 
things, since this was the pious and God-loving tradition of the Fathers. The 
empress straightway brought out the image of the Theotokos for all to see, and 
venerating it, she said, “Let all be condemned who do not venerate the images, 
kissing them in love, not in worship as gods, but as images for the sake of the 
love of their archetypes. And they rejoiced with great joy. And in response she 
entreated them to pray for her husband Theophilus. Seeing her faith, they 
obeyed reluctantly. For Patriarch Methodius among the saints assembled all the 
people, priests and bishops and proceeded to God’s Great Church. Among the 
assembled were Joannicius the Great from Olympus, Arsaacius, Pancratius and 
the disciples of Theodore the Studite, and confessors Theophanes and Theodore 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Graptoi, Michael of the Holy City and Singelus and many others. And they 
prayed to God for Theophilus in tears all night long. Now this took place 
throughout the first week of the Great Fast, with the empress Theodora herself, 
the women and all the people taking part. Having completed the prayers, the 
empress Theodora retired at dawn on Friday, and dreamed that she was at the 
foot of the Cross, and there were several people passing noisily by, wearing 
various instruments of torture. As she recognized the Emperor Theophilus 
among those being led with his hands bound behind his back, she followed the 
group and its guards. When they reached the brass gates, she saw a supernatural 
vision, a man sitting in front of the image of Christ and Theophilus brought 
before him. Reaching to touch his feet, the empress prayed for the emperor. He 
opened his mouth and said, “Great is thy faith, O woman. Know that because of 
thy tears and thy faith, as well as the prayers and petitions of My servants and My 
priests, I grant forgiveness to thy husband Theophilus.” Then He said to the 
guards, “Loose him and give him to his wife.” And taking him, she departed 
rejoicing in gladness. And immediately the dream left her. Now Patriarch 
Methodius, while the prayers and petitions were being offered for him, had taken 
a new parchment scroll and written the names of all the heretical emperors, 
including Theophilus, placing it under the holy altar table. But on Friday he saw a 
great and terrible angel entering the temple, coming to him and saying, “Thy 
petition has been heard, O Bishop, and the Emperor Theophilus has received 
forgiveness. Trouble the Godhead about this no longer.” And desiring to 
ascertain the truth of his vision the Patriarch descended from his place, and 
taking the parchment and unrolling it, he found (O, the judgments of God!) that 
all reference to the name of Theophilus has been erased by God. Upon hearing 
this, the empress rejoiced greatly and requested the Patriarch to assemble all the 
people with the holy icons and crosses in the great church, so that might be 
adorned with the holy icons and God’s new miracle could be known by all. And 
soon when all had gathered in the church holding candles, the empress arrived 
with her son. And a Litiya was served there with the holy icons and the divine 
and precious wood of the Cross and with the sacred and divine Gospels. And 
leaving the church, calling out, “Lord, have mercy,” they processed the agreed 
mile. Then they returned to the church, where Divine Liturgy was celebrated. 
When the holy and precious icons were returned to their place, the holy men 
mentioned earlier and the pious Orthodox rulers were glorified, and those 
impious people who did not accept the honor of the holy icons were 
anathematized and condemned. And from that time these holy confessors 

--- PAGE 11 ---
appointed the annual commemoration of this solemnity, so that we might never 
again fall into a similar ignominy. 
O unchanging Image of the Father,  
through the prayers of Thy holy confessors,  
have mercy on us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: In the Persian furnace the youths ... 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Let the hosts of angels share in the joy of the Church, that with love and 
divine wisdom, they may cry aloud: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, in the temple of 
Thy glory.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
The triumphant assembly and Church of the firstborn rejoiceth now as it 
beholdeth the people of God with one accord crying aloud: “Blessed art Thou, 
O Lord, in the temple of Thy glory.”  
Glory ..., Delivered from the dark heresies of the past through the decision of 
the honored Empress Theodora, we cry aloud: “Blessed art Thou, O Lord, in the 
temple of Thy glory.”  
Both now ..., O all-pure One, thou art exalted above the choirs on high, for 
alone among women thou hast become Mother of the Creator of all. Wherefore 
in joy we cry aloud: “Blessed art thou among women, O all-immaculate Lady.”  
Katavasia: In the Persian furnace the youths and descendants of Abraham, 
* burning with a love of piety * rather than by a flame of fire, * cried aloud 
saying: * Blessed art Thou in the temple of Thy glory, O Lord. 
ODE VIII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Stretching forth his hands ... 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
Keeping the laws of the Church that we have received from the Fathers, we 
write icons, and with our lips and heart and we venerate them as we cry aloud: O 
all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
The honor and veneration shown to the icon, is ascribed to the prototype it 
represents, following the divinely-inspired teachings, wherefore with faith we cry 
aloud to Christ: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord.  
Refrain: Let us bless Father, Son, Holy Spirit, the Lord!  
Her mind enlightened by the illumination of the divine Spirit, the honored 
Empress, filled with the fruits of divine wisdom, and with love of the splendor of 
Christ’s Church, along with all the faithful, blesseth Jesus, the God-Man.  
Both now ..., Illumined by rays of noetic light, Thy holy house 
overshadoweth all with the cloud of the Spirit, and sanctifieth the faithful who 
sing with one accord: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord.  
Refrain: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, chanting and supremely 
exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: Having spread his hands, Daniel closed the lions’ jaws * in 
their den; * while the zealously pious youths, * girded with virtue, * 
quenched the power of the fire and cried aloud: * Bless ye the Lord, all ye 
works of the Lord. 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)  
ODE IX 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The canon from the Triodion:  
Irmos: Christ, the Chief Cornerstone ... 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
Seeing the honorable Church once more adorned with divinely-written 
images, let us make haste and with reverence cry aloud to God: We magnify 
Thee, O Thrice-Holy One.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee.  
As a mark of glory and honor, the Church possesseth Thy Cross and the 
honorable icons, and depictions of the saints, and with joy and gladness O 
Master, she magnifieth Thee.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Glory ..., Shine upon our rulers with Thy divine glory, O compassionate One, 
and encompass them about with the protection of the angelic hosts, bringing 
into subjection, the haughtiness of the heathen, O Master.  
Both now ..., The condemnation of our first mother Eve hath been 
abolished, since thou, O pure One, beyond understanding, hast given birth to the 
Master of all; and now we kiss His likeness in the icons.  
Katavasia: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee 
the unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the 
disparate natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion for the Resurrection Gospel of the week, then: 
Glory ..., from the Triodion, in Tone III: 
Leap for joy and clap your hands, * and with gladness sing aloud: * How 
strange and wonderful are Thy works, O Christ! * And who can tell of all Thy 
mighty acts, O Savior, ** Who hast united in harmony and with one accord the 
Church!  
Both now ..., from the Triodion:  
The swords of hostile heresy now have failed, * and every memory of it, with 
all its tumult, hath vanished away. * For we see thy temple, O all-pure One, in all 
its splendor, * adorned with the grace of the precious icons, ** and we all are 
filled therewith.  
On the Aposticha, 5 Resurrection Stichera, in the Tone of the week: 
And 4 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone IV:  
 Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
O Lover of mankind, * the Church now rejoiceth in Thee, her Bridegroom 
and Founder, * for by Thy divine Will Thou hast delivered her from the error of 
idolatry, * and by Thy precious Blood Thou hast betrothed her to Thyself. * 
With joy she accepts the restoration of the holy icons, * and with faith she sings 
in praise of Thee ** and in faith renders Thee glory.  
Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell of all 
Thy wonders.  
Having restored the representations of Thy flesh, O Lord, * affectionately 
kissing them, * we elucidate the great mystery of Thy dispensation. * For Thou 

--- PAGE 14 ---
didst not appear to us, O Lover of mankind, * merely in outward semblance, * as 
say the followers of Mani, * the enemies of God, * but in the full and true reality 
of the flesh; * and so the icons that depict Thy flesh ** lead us to the desire and 
love of Thee.  
Verse: I will be glad and rejoice in Thee, * I will sing to Thy name, O 
Most High.  
A feast of joy and gladness hath been revealed to us today. * For the dogmas 
of the true Faith shine forth, * rendering the Church of Christ bright with 
splendor, * adorning her with the holy icons * which have now been restored; ** 
whereby God hath granted to the faithful unity of mind.  
Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget not 
Thy paupers to the end.  
In Tone VI: Moses, in the season of abstinence, * received the Law and 
proclaimed it to the people. * Elijah by fasting closed the heavens; * and the 
three Children of Abraham through fasting overcame the lawless tyrant. * Count 
us also worthy, O Christ, * through fasting to attain the Feast of Thy 
Resurrection, as we cry aloud: ** Holy God, Holy and Strong One, and Holy 
Immortal One, have mercy on us.  
 
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Moses, in the season of abstinence, * received the Law and proclaimed it to 
the people. * Elijah by fasting closed the heavens; * and the three Children of 
Abraham through fasting overcame the lawless tyrant. * Count us also worthy, O 
Christ, * through fasting to attain the Feast of Thy Resurrection, as we cry aloud: 
** Holy God, Holy and Strong One, and Holy Immortal One, have mercy on us.  
 Both now ..., in Tone II:  
Most Blessed art Thou, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him Who 
became incarnate of thee is Hades led captive, * Adam recalled, the curse 
annulled, Eve set free, death slain, * and we are given life. Wherefore, we cry 
aloud in praise: * Blessed art Thou, O Christ God, * Who hast been thus well-
pleased, glory to Thee.  
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Before the 1st Hour: Glory ..., Both now ..., Gospel Sticheron for the week. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika and Beatitudes: 6 in the Tone of the week, 4 from ODE VI of the 
canon of the Triodion: 
The Master’s countenance is depicted, honored with faith, and venerated; 
whereby the Church regaineth her boldness before God, reverently glorifying the 
Savior.  
The Church of Christ hath been delivered from the darkness of heresy: 
putting on a robe of gladness, she is clothed in the light of divine grace.  
Glory ..., The Orthodox people have regained the light and glory which it had 
of old, through the decree of the Empress Theodora and her pious son the 
Emperor Michael.  
Both now ..., He Who of old commanded Moses to make the ark of the 
covenant, came to dwell within thee, as if in a noetic ark: He alone is supremely 
glorified, making thy temple glorious with miracles.  
Order of Troparia & Kontakia for a temple dedicated to a Saint/s:  
Troparion of the Resurrection, in the Tone of the week. 
Troparion of the Triodion, in Tone II: 
We venerate Thine immaculate icon, O good One, * asking the pardon of our 
transgressions, O Christ God. * For of Thine own will Thou wast well-pleased to 
ascend the Cross in the flesh, * that Thou mightest deliver from the slavery to 
the enemy those Whom Thou hast fashioned. * Therefore in thanksgiving we cry 
to Thee: * Thou didst fill all things with joy, O our Savior, ** when Thou camest 
to save the world. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion of the Triodion, in Tone VIII:  
The uncircumscribed Word of the Father hath become circumscribed, * 
taking flesh from thee, O Theotokos, * and He hath restored the sullied image to 
its ancient glory, filling it with divine beauty. ** This our salvation we confess in 
deed and word, and we depict it in the holy icons.  
 
Prokeimenon for Tone IV, The hymn of the Fathers: Blessed art Thou O 
Lord, the God of our Fathers, * and praised and glorified is Thy name 
unto the ages. 
Verse: For righteous art Thou in all which Thou hast done for us 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. (11:24 - 26, 32 - 40) 
Brethren: By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called 
the son of Pharaoh’s daughter; Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the 
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the 
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect 
unto the recompence of the reward. And what shall I more say? for the time 
would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; 
of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: Who through faith subdued 
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of 
lions. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of 
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of 
the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were 
tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection: 
And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds 
and imprisonment: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, 
were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; 
being destitute, afflicted, tormented; (Of whom the world was not worthy:) they 
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And 
these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise: 
God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not 
be made perfect. 
Alleluia from the Triodion, in Tone VIII:  
Verse: Moses and Aaron among His priests, and Samuel among them that 
call upon His name. 
Verse: They called upon the Lord, and He hearkened unto them. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (1:43-51) 
At the time: Jesus went forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto 
him, Follow me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 
Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom 
Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of 
Joseph. And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of 
Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to 
him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile! Nathanael 
saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, 
Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. 
Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou 
art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto 

--- PAGE 17 ---
thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things 
than these. And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye 
shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the 
Son of man. 
 
Communion Hymn: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the 
highest. 
Another Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for the 
upright. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
VESPERS ON SUNDAY EVENING  
(There is no chanting of the Psalter) 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 4 penitential Stichera in the Tone 
of the week, and then the following 3 Stichera from the Triodion: 
Two by Joseph, in Tone IV: 
 Spec. Mel.: “Thou hast given a sign ...”: 
Grant me compunction, and estrangement from evil, * and perfect 
amendment, * for I am sunk in the depths of carnal passions * and separated far 
from Thee, O God, the King of all; * and I have no other hope but Thee. * In 
the abundance of Thy goodness * save me, the prodigal, O Jesus all-Powerful, ** 
the Savior of our souls 
The great Moses, cleansed by fasting, * saw the God for whom he longed. * 
Eagerly follow his example, O my humble soul; * make haste to cleanse thyself 
from evil in the day of abstinence, * and so thou shalt behold the Lord who 
granteth thee forgiveness, ** for He is all-powerful and the Lover of mankind. 
One by Theodore, in Tone IV: 
Let us now set out with joy upon the second week of the Fast; * and from 
day to day, O brethren, let us fashion for ourselves, * a fiery chariot as did Elijah 
the Tishbite, * from the four great virtues; * let us exalt our minds through 
freedom from the passions; * let us arm our flesh with purity, ** putting to flight 
and gaining victory over, the enemy. 
Then 3 Stichera from the Menaion;  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion.  
Entrance with the censer, “O joyous Light ...”:  
Great Prokeimenon: in Tone VIII:  
Prokeimenon: O Lord, Thou hast given an inheritance * to them that fear 
Thy Name. 
Verse: From the ends of the earth unto Thee have I cried. 
Verse: I shall be sheltered in the shelter of Thy wings. 
Verse: So will I chant unto Thy name unto the ages. 
And then once more: O Lord, Thou hast given an inheritance ..., 
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
At this point the priest (in the Altar) removeth his Phelonion and 
changeth his Epitrachelion to one of a dark color (black or dark purple); 
The covers on the Icon-stands and the other coverings in the church are 
also changed. 
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”:  
Litany: Let us complete ..., 
Note: from this point on, the choir singeth the responses according to the 
penitential Lenten melody.  
Aposticha, in Tone VIII:  
Come, let us cleanse ourselves with almsgiving * and acts of mercy to the 
poor, * not sounding a trumpet or making a show of our charity. * Let not our 
left hand know what our right hand doeth; * and let not vainglory scatter the 
fruits of our kindness; * but in secret let us call upon Him Who knoweth all 
secrets: ** Father, forgive us our trespasses, for Thou lovest mankind 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.  
Repeat: Come, let us cleanse ourselves ... 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
O martyrs of the Lord, ye hallow every place * and heal all manner of 
infirmities; * and now we entreat you to pray on our behalf ** that our souls be 
delivered from the snares of the enemy.  
Glory from the Menaion, if there is one, then: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Those in heaven hymn thee, * O joyously blessed Mother unwedded, * and 
we glorify thine inscrutable birthgiving, O Theotokos; ** pray that our souls be 
saved!  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
 
 

--- PAGE 20 ---
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with thee; 
blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for thou 
hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than 
the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the very 
Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and unto 
the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim (once only) 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love bestow 
upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee  
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen, Lord, have mercy (Thrice), father 
(master) bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
 
