--- PAGE 1 ---
TUESDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 10th Kathisma 
from the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns of the Cross in the Tone of the 
week. After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma XI), the Sessional 
Hymns: 
Sessional Hymn, by Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Restraining the passions with the bridle of a pure fast, * let us strive to raise 
our mind in the most perfect faith * to venerable contemplation. * Let us 
despise the pleasures of this earthly life, ** that we may attain to a heavenly life 
and divine effulgence. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Both now ..., In Tone VIII: 
From the multitude of my wicked and unlawful deeds, * I have fallen into 
the depths of despair, * and am held captive and perplexed by despondency. * 
O Lady Theotokos, * do thou save and help me, ** for thou art the 
compassionate forgiveness and salvation of sinners. 
Then the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma XII) followed by: 
Sessional Hymn; by Theodore, in Tone VIII: 
The Fast hath set before us a mystic table, * inviting us all to partake 
abundantly thereof. * We shall partake of the everlasting gifts of the Spirit; * we 
shall drink of the divinely flowing stream of tears. ** Let us thereby rejoice and 
offer ceaseless praise unto God. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
O all-holy Virgin, save us from every threat and wickedness of men; for 
thee do we have as our protection and aid, fleeing to thee, O Mother of God, 
and unto our God Who was born from thee; entreat Him, that He deliver us 
from tribulations and sorrows.  
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; for those ODES, we 
chant the ODE of the 3rd Canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE II 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Behold now, and see that I am your God, * begotten of the Father 
before all ages, * conceived without a man in these latter times from the 
Virgin, * abolishing the sin of the forefather Adam, * as the Lover of 
mankind. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Groan and weep, O my soul, turn back and repent, the day draweth near, 
the Judge is at the door. Make ready thine answer and cry aloud: “I have sinned 
against Thee, O compassionate, merciful and loving One: do Thou have 
compassion upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, hate the destructive fullness of sin, rather, rejoice in the strict 
fullness of the Fast. Make the commandments of salvation thy food, which will 
enable thee through faith to enjoy eternal blessings. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O ye angels, powers and principalities, archangels, dominions and thrones, 
rulers, cherubim and seraphim, pray to God that we may be granted the 
remission of our sins and release from the passions. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Thou alone didst bear the eternal Word who took flesh from thee, yet 
without change remained as He was before, O all-immaculate One; and having 
not known a man, thou didst remain a virgin even after child-bearing; pray thou 
on behalf of us all, that our life may be delivered from corruption. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Another canon, by Theodore, in Tone II: 
Irmos: See now, see that I am your God ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
We have seen, and we have come to know that Thou didst appoint the fast 
to bring us to repentance O compassionate One. Receive, O merciful God, the 
prayers which we offer in this season, that they may be set forth in Thy sight O 
Good One, as fragrant incense and an acceptable sacrifice. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I tremble and am filled with fear when I reflect upon how greatly I have 
sinned. How shall I meet Thee? How shall I stand before Thy judgment seat 
where there shall be no respect of persons? Spare me, then, O merciful Lord, in 
the hour when Thou shalt come to judge all the earth. 
Glory ..., Exceedingly perfect Unity in three Hypostases, supreme Godhead, 
Father unbegotten, Son only-begotten, Spirit proceeding forth from the Father 
and manifest through the Son: single in Essence and in Nature, one Lordship 
and one Kingdom, save us all. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The wonder of Thy conceiving is beyond 
description, O Mother and Virgin: for how canst thou give birth and yet 
remained pure? How canst thou bear a child, without having known a man? All 
this is understood to transcend the laws of nature, by the Word of God, who 
was born in a new and marvelous manner. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
 The men of Nineveh repented and fasted, and Thou didst deliver them 
from the wrath that threatened them; but Thou didst consume with fire the 
men of Sodom in their wanton shamelessness. Do Thou deliver me, O Christ, 
from the punishment which they suffered. 
Katavasia: Behold now, and see that I am your God, * Who hath 
sanctified for you as acceptable offering, * the tenth part of the days of 
every year, * and this commandment have I given unto my people * for 
their deliverance from the passions * and as the beginning of salvation. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely 
eloquent children sang: * “Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord.” 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou didst justify the Publican who lamented, and didst have compassion 
upon the Harlot who wept from her heart. O Savior, do Thou save and have 
compassion upon the souls of those who sing Thy praises. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
By fasting let us bring to the Lord the fruit of our virtuous deeds. Let us 
refrain from harmful thoughts, that we may receive divine joy.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The choirs of the angels, the assembly of the apostles and the ranks of the 
martyrs entreat Thee, O Jesus, to grant Thy people remission of sins. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: With all the faithful, let us bless the Virgin: for she is the 
Mountain uncut by hand, the Candlestick that bore the Light, the easily 
ascended Ladder, and dwelling-place of God. 
Second canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: Glorified in the holy mountain ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
On this solemn day of abstinence let us all make music in hymns: and keep 
festival with a holy joy, let us praise the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Of old the man of God was led astray by the prophet and ate of the food of 
disobedience, and was consumed. Be watchful, then, O my soul, and let not the 
serpent of gluttony deceive thee. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
As a Unity in Essence I sing Thy praises; as a Trinity in Hypostases I 
venerate Thee, the Father, Son and Most holy Spirit, and the power of Thy 
beginningless Kingdom do I glorify throughout all ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou art manifest as the Mountain 
of God upon which Christ came to dwell; and He hath made into divine 
temples all those who sing: “Praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Come, ye people, let us greet the Fast with love, for it is the guardian of 
purity and the mother of dispassion; and let us praise the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: Glorified in the holy mountain, * the Lord revealed the 
mystery of the Ever-Virgin unto Moses * in the flames of the burning 
bush: * praise ye and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire 
of the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the 
salvation of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we 
magnify thee. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
A good Fast doth enrich our heart, divinely rendering it greater in virtue, like 
a full ear of wheat. Let us therefore fast with gladness in these holy days, and 
thus receive sanctification. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I am defiled by a multitude of sins, wounded and condemned. Do Thou 
look mercifully upon me, O compassionate One, and save me by the prayers of 
Thy saints. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Alas for thee, most miserable soul, what answer shalt thou give? Great shall 
be the fear that shall seize thee, when the Judge is seated upon His throne and 
ten thousands of the angels stand round about! Make haste, then, and repent 
before the end. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O chariot of the King, cloud of light, rich mountain, hill 
flowing with milk, we entreat thee, O unwedded Virgin, heal the passions of our 
souls. 
Second canon, in Tone II: 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Let us keep a true fast before the Lord: let us abstain not only from food 
but from angry speech and falsehood, and from every other passion, that we 
may behold Pascha in purity. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Samuel was enlightened by the fruit of fasting; by it Samson grew to be 
brave and strong; by it priests and prophets were made perfect: and through the 
holy Fast may we likewise be sanctified.  
Glory ..., O Lord, the threefold Brightness of Thy single Power doth 
illumine our mind with the divine light of revelation; turning us aside from the 
delusion that divideth, bringing us to the divine unifying life. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou art our armor and our 
rampart; thou art the protection of those who flee unto thee. And now we 
implore thine intercession, that we may be delivered from our enemies. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The Fast, filled with the Holy Spirit doth beckon us to it’s rich banquet, 
with gladness let us partake of the gifts of grace and sing His praises as our 
God. 
Katavasia: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the 
fire of the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the 
salvation of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we 
magnify thee. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone V: 
O my soul, why art thou melancholic, serving sin? * And in Thy sickness 
why dost thou not run to the physician? * Behold, now is the acceptable time; * 
behold, now is the true day of salvation. * Rise up and wash Thy face with the 
tears of repentance, * and make Thy lamp burn brightly with the oil of good 
deeds, ** that Christ our God may grant thee cleansing and great mercy 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: O my soul, why art thou melancholic ..., 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone V: 
O Lord, Thy passion-bearers, imitated the angelic life * with patience 
enduring tortures as though bodiless ones, * placing all their hope in the 
blessings which Thou hast promised. * By their prayers, O Christ our God, ** 
grant peace to Thy world, and to our souls great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone V: 
We bless thee, O Virgin Theotokos, * and we, the faithful, glorify thee as is 
meet, * thou unassailable city, * impregnable rampart, ** and steadfast 
intercession and refuge of our souls.  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. With the reading of 
the 13th Kathisma. The 14th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 15h 
at the Sixth Hour. The 16th Kathisma is read at the Ninth Hour. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone VI: 
We cannot worthily sing Thy praises O Lord, * but as supplicants we entreat 
Thee: * Destroy us not in our iniquities, ** for Thou art always ready to forgive. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Lord, I have loved the beauty of Thy house, * and the 
place where Thy glory dwelleth. 
Verse: Judge me, O Lord, for in mine innocence have I walked. 
 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (5: 7 - 16) 
Thus saith the Lord; the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, 
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but 
behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry. Woe unto them that 
join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be 
placed alone in the midst of the earth! In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a 
truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant. 
Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall 
yield an ephah. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may 
follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them! And the 
harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they 
regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. 
Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge: 
and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst. 
Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: 
and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall 
descend into it. And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man 
shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: But the Lord of 
hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in 
righteousness. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone III: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord is my light and my savior: * whom then shall I 
fear? 
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life: of whom then shall I be 
afraid? 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
TUESDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
These 3 Stichera from the Triodion, two by Joseph, in Tone I: 
O Christ, having stretched Thy sinless hands upon the Cross, * Thou didst 
gather together the ends of the earth. * Wherefore I cry unto Thee: * Gather 
together my scattered mind, * taken captive by the passions; * and having fully 
cleansed me through abstinence, ** make me a sharer in Thy sufferings. 
Of old the Children in Babylon were strengthened by fasting, * which, as it 
is written, made them mightier than the flames of fire. * Fast then O my 
humble soul, * and kindle within Thyself love for the Master, * for thereby thou 
shalt escape the fire of Gehenna to come ** burning up the destroying passions. 
One by Theodore, in Tone III:  
The season of the Fast is one of gladness. * shining forth in purity and 
unfeigned love, * filled to abundance with the light of prayer and every virtue, * 
wherefore with rejoicing let us cry aloud: * O most Holy Cross of Christ, which 
hath brought forth the joy of life, * count us worthy to venerate thee with pure 
hearts, ** and grant us forgiveness and great mercy. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion; 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord, save Thy people * and bless Thine inheritance. 
Verse: Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry; O my God. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (4:8 - 15) 
Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in 
the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him. And the 
Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I 
my brother’s keeper? And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy 
brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground. And now art thou cursed from 
the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from thy 
hand; When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her 
strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth. And Cain said 
unto the Lord, My punishment is greater than I can bear. Behold, thou hast 
driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be 

--- PAGE 11 ---
hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to 
pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me. And the Lord said unto him, 
Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. 
And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord Will give strength unto His people; * the Lord 
Will bless His people with peace. 
Verse: Bring unto the Lord, ye sons of God, bring unto the Lord glory 
and honor. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (5:1 - 15) 
O My son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my understanding: 
That thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge. For 
the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother 
than oil: But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. Her 
feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell. Lest thou shouldest ponder 
the path of life, her ways are moveable, that thou canst not know them. Hear 
me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words of my mouth. 
Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house: Lest 
thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel: Lest strangers 
be filled with thy wealth; and thy labors be in the house of a stranger; And thou 
mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, And say, How 
have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof; And have not obeyed 
the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! I 
was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly. Drink 
waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone III: 
Thou wast crucified in the flesh, O Lord, * crucifying our fallen nature with 
Thyself; * Thy side was pierced by a spear, * piercing the serpent which had 
destroyed mankind. * Do Thou nail down my flesh with the fear of Thee * and 
wound my soul with love for Thee, * that gazing upon Thy Passion, * I may 
pass through the appointed time of the Fast in abstinence. * Guarding not only 
my appetite, but all the other entrances of sin, * may I repent of my past sins, 
that I may offer Thee in sacrifice a humble spirit and a contrite heart, ** and 
deliver me from my offences O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 

--- PAGE 12 ---
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: Thou wast crucified in the flesh, O Lord ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
The prophets, the apostles of Christ and the martyrs * have taught all to 
sing the praises of the consubstantial Trinity; * they have given light to the 
nations that were gone astray, ** and they have made sons of men companions 
of angels. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thy Son hanging upon the Tree, * O all-
immaculate Virgin, * lamenting thou didst cry aloud: * “Where hath Thy light-
giving beauty gone, * with Which Thou hast adorned the nature of man, ** O 
my beloved Child?” 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 

--- PAGE 13 ---
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, 
and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make 
steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every 
defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One 
is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore. (Thrice) 
 
 
Psalm 33 

--- PAGE 14 ---
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
