--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT MATINS  
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 13th Kathisma, 
and then the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the 
week. After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (14th Kathisma), the following 
Sessional Hymns. 
 In Tone IV: 
Having raised ourselves above the carnal and earthy passions through 
fasting, * let us exalt the Lord who hath been exalted upon the Cross, * and 
hath thereby raised up the world. * Let us attentively drink of the cup of 
contrition; * and let us reflect upon that day and hour ** at which we shall stand 
before the eternal Judge. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Stavrotheotokion: When Thine unwedded Mother beheld Thee * hanging 
upon the Cross, * she lamented bitterly and cried out to Thee: * “What is this 
strange and new wonder, O my Son? * How is it that the lawless people have 
nailed to the Cross, * Thee, the Life of all, ** O my sweetest Light,?” 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (15th Kathisma), the following Sessional 
Hymns: 
In Tone V: 
The grace of Thy Cross shineth forth, O Lord, * enlightening all the 
inhabited earth; * utterly destroying the power of devils, * adorning the season 
of fasting; ** strengthened thereby do Thou have mercy on us. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Stavrotheotokion: When the Mother who bore Thee without the pangs of 
childbirth * beheld Thee lifted up upon the Cross, * weeping, she lamented 
crying aloud: * “Woe is me, O my sweetest Son! * I am wounded in the depths 
of my soul, * seeing Thee now nailed upon the Cross ** as a malefactor, 
between two thieves.” 
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion, for those ODES, we 
chant the ODE of the 3rd Canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE V 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: The wicked will not behold Thy glory, O Christ, * but we who rise 
early to hymn Thee shall behold Thee, * the Only-Begotten effulgence of 
Thy Father’s divinity, * O Lover of mankind. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Of Thine own will, O Master, Thou wast exalted upon the Cross, casting 
down the enemy. Do Thou also, of Thine own will, raise me up in Thy 
compassion, for I am cast down into the pit of sensual pleasure. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
My soul hath been darkened by corrupt passions, enlighten me O Jesus, as 
when stretched out upon the Cross, having darkened the sun, Thou didst give 
light to the whole of the inhabited world.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Grant me O Christ, a peaceful voyage across the sea of the Fast; still the 
troubled waters of my mind, and anchor me in the haven of the Resurrection. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Stavrotheotokion: With pure minds let us noetically honor the pure One, the 
beauty of Jacob; and adorning ourselves with spiritual struggles, let us praise her 
with reverence as the Mother of our God.  
Another Canon by Theodore, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Upon those who worship Thee by night O Christ ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Crucified, Thou didst release me from corruption; and pierced by a lance, 
Thou hast made me immortal. I glorify Thine ineffable mercy, O Christ, for 
Thou hast come to save me. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Stretching out Thine arms upon the Cross, O Lord, Thou didst slay the 
invisible Amalek and thereby rescue Thy people: wherefore we hymn Thy 
might.  
Glory ..., A Godhead in three Hypostases, one Sovereignty above all essence 
Let us praise the beginningless Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Him whom the heavens could not contain, hast 
thou conceived within thy womb and given birth as a child; O awesome wonder 
transcending speech! Wherefore we all sing in praise of thee, O most pure One. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
For my sake Thou didst endure crucifixion, partake of vinegar, and cry 
aloud “It is finished”: do Thou help me to finish the course of the season of the 
Fast and deem me worthy to behold Thine Arising. 
Katavasia: Upon those who worship Thee by night O Christ, * have 
mercy, and grant them peace, * for Thy commandments are light and 
healing to Thy servants, * O Lover of mankind. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Nailed to the Cross for the sake of Thy loving-kindness, Thou didst open 
Paradise to the Thief, and now I have fallen among thieves through the cunning 
of the evil one; heal Thou my soul and my whole body which have been 
grievously wounded, and in Thy love for mankind open unto me the gates of 
repentance. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Through fasting let us sanctify our flesh, and enrich our souls with the 
virtues. Let us feed the poor and thus acquire unfailing wealth in the heavens, 
and so let us cry: “O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely 
exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
At Thy Passion all creation shook with fear, seeing Thee nailed upon the 
Cross O supremely good Savior, and since My mind is also shaken by the 

--- PAGE 4 ---
assaults of the serpent: I pray Thee, O compassionate One, establish it firmly 
upon the rock of Thy will. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou art the Portal of God that hath remained closed, and 
through which the Lord alone hath passed: direct me on the divine path of piety 
and open unto me the gates of salvation, O Virgin who art full of the grace of 
God, for thou alone art the Protection of all, and to thee do I flee for refuge. 
Second canon, in Tone V: 
Irmos: The Fashioner of all creation ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
The all-holy Tree upon which Thou, O my Christ, wast crucified, do I 
hymn, and supremely bless throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
The transgressors crucified and killed Thee on Golgotha, O Christ: but 
Thou dost live and save us throughout the ages. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord 
In a strange manner the Trinity is divided, yet remaineth undivided as God. 
Him do we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Intercede for those who sing thy praises, O Most 
pure One, that they may be delivered from every danger and temptation. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Having strengthened me by the power of the Cross, O Lord, grant me to 
courageously complete the course of the Fast. 
Verse: We praise, bless and Worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: The Fashioner of all creation, * whom the angels fear: * let us 
praise, O ye people, * and supremely exalt throughout all ages! 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: A cornerstone not cut by hand O Virgin, * was cut from thee the 
unhewn mountain: * even Christ, Who hath joined together the disparate 
natures; * therefore rejoicing we magnify thee, * O Theotokos. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
 The prophet saw Thee, O Savior, as a stone quarried from the mountain of 
the Virgin; and at Thy Crucifixion Thou didst rend stones asunder. O all-
merciful One free me who am weighed down by the heavy stones of spiritual 
inattentiveness. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Fast O my soul, from wickedness, and take delight in divine love. Open 
wide the door to every virtuous thought, and by abstinence and prayer guard 
thine entrance against evil. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O my Master and Savior, through Thy Cross Thou didst condemn the 
enmity that made me an enemy of God. Save me, defiled as I am by passions 
and darkened by sins, that I be not sent to the punishment of Gehenna. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: When Thou shalt come in glory to judge the world, spare me, 
O Christ, destroy the dark mist of my wickedness by the prayers of her who 
gave birth to Thee, and make me an inheritor of Thy heavenly Kingdom. 
Second canon, in Tone V: 
Irmos: O Isaiah, dance now and be glad ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
By Thy Crucifixion Thou didst open Paradise again and deliver me from the 
eternal death of disobedience, wherefore rejoicing I partake of life, and magnify 
Thee as my God, O Lover of mankind.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
O Lord, Thy life-creating Cross hath turned the seal of the curse into a seal 
of blessing, for beholding Thee raised upon it, we who before were dead are 
raised to life, and chanting Thy praises we magnify Thee as our Master. 
Glory ..., O honored Trinity, consubstantial, beginningless, source of life, 
undivided Unity, I sing Thy praises: The Father unbegotten, the Word and Son 
begotten, and the Holy Spirit, save us who glorify Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Beyond understanding is thy childbearing, O 
Mother of God. For without a man thou didst conceive, and in virginity thou 
didst give birth; and the Child borne from thee is God, wherefore we magnify 
Him, O Virgin, and thee we call blessed. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O precious Cross, my strength and refuge, bestow upon me light and joy; 
purify me through abstinence and deliver me from temptation, that I may 
glorify Thee, and magnify Christ the Master. 
Katavasia: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in 
her womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and 
man; * and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we 
call blessed. 
The small litany. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VIII: 
Slaying the passions, * the present Fast doth bring the promise of healing * 
to those grievously wounded by sin. * God hath bestowed the Fast upon us to 
help us: * let us honor and accept it * as if it were the divinely-Written tablets of 
the Law, * given through Moses. * Let us not choose wanton self-indulgence, * 
through which the tablets were once shattered; * let us not perish with those 
whose carcasses fell in the wilderness. * Let us not be like the Jews, of a sad 
countenance, * rather, let us rejoice with the Church. * Let us not be hypocrites 
like the Pharisees, * but in the spirit of the Gospels let us put on the beauty of 
holiness, ** glorying in the Cross of Christ the Redeemer of our souls. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Slaying the passions ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
What shall we call you, O saints? * Cherubim, for Christ hath rested upon 
you? * Seraphim, for without ceasing ye have glorified Him? * Angels, for ye 
have renounced the flesh? * Powers, for ye perform miracles? * Manifold are 
your names, but greater are your gifts of grace: ** pray ye that our souls be 
saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: “What is this strange wonder?” * cried the Virgin to the 
Lord, as a mother to her child. * “The bitter pangs I knew not when I bore 
Thee, O my Son, * have now pierced my heart. * O Thou Light of mine eyes, I 
cannot bear to see Thee * nailed upon the Cross. * But do Thou hasten to arise, 
as Thou hast promised, * that with all the world I may glorify ** Thy dread and 
salvific dispensation.” 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately beginneth the first hour. Without the 
reading of a Kathisma. The 19th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 
20th at the Sixth Hour.  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone I: 
Night and day we fall down before Thee, O Lord, * beseeching Thee to 
grant unto our souls remission of sins, * that we may worship Thee in peace 
and glorify Thee, ** in so far as Thou lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger, * neither chasten 
me in Thy wrath. 
Verse: For Thine arrows are fastened in me, and Thou hast laid Thy 
hand heavily upon me. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (7: 1-14) 
It came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, 
king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king 
of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail 
against it. And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with 
Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of 
the wood are moved with the wind. Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth 
now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of 
the upper pool in the highway of the fuller’s field; And say unto him, Take 
heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these 
smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of 
Remaliah. Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil 
counsel against thee, saying, Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us 
make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of 
Tabeal: Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to 
pass. For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; 
and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a 
people. And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is 
Remaliah’s son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. 
Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee a sign of the Lord 
thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. But Ahaz said, I will 
not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. And he said, Hear ye now, O house of 
David; Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? 
Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, 
and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Hearken unto my prayer, O Lord, * and unto my 
supplication, give ear. 
Verse: I said, I will take heed to my ways: lest I sin with my tongue. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
FRIDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera,  
Two Stichera from the Triodion, by St. Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Now is the acceptable time, * now is the day of salvation. * According to 
the multitude of Thy mercies * visit my soul, and release me from the burden of 
my transgressions, ** for Thou alone lovest mankind. (Twice) 
After which we chant 4 Stichera to the Martyrs from the Oktoechos, in 
the Tone of the week, and 4 Stichera from the Menaion (Repeating the 
first) 
Glory ..., Oktoechos verse for the Reposed, in the Tone of the week. 
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
Then, “O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Let Thy mercy and Thy truth * continually help me. 
Verse: With patience I waited patiently for the Lord, and He was 
attentive unto me, and He hearkened unto my supplication. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (5:32 - 6:8) 
Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and 
daughters were born unto them. That the sons of God saw the daughters of 
men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose. And 
the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is 
flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. There were giants in 
the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto 
the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty 
men which were of old, men of renown. And God saw that the wickedness of 
man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his 
heart was only evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had made man 
on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And the Lord said, I will destroy 
man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and 
the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made 
them. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: I said, O Lord, have mercy on me: * heal my soul, for I 
have sinned against Thee. 
Verse: Blessed is the man who hath understanding for the poor man and 
the pauper. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (6:20 - 7:1) 
My son, keep thy father’s commandment, and forsake not the law of thy 
mother: Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck. 
When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and 
when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee. For the commandment is a lamp; and 
the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life: To keep thee 
from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman. Lust 
not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids. For 
by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread: and the 
adulteress will hunt for the precious life. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and 
his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be 
burned? So he that goeth in to his neighbor’s wife; whosoever toucheth her 
shall not be innocent. Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul 
when he is hungry; But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give 
all the substance of his house. But whoso committeth adultery with a woman 
lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul. A wound and 
dishonor shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away. For jealousy is 
the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He will 
not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many 
gifts. My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. 
 
And the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
FRIDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT COMPLINE 
In the Greek typicon, the Akathist Hymn is chanted at Small Compline, 
exactly as on the previous Friday, except we chant the second section of 
the Akathist Hymn, beginning at the fourth Ikos, and ending with the 
seventh Kontakion: After Our Father ..., we say the Kontakion to the 
Martyrs: There is no reading
For Convenience the service is presented below: 
 from the Gospel at the end, as there was on 
the Friday of the first week. 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: Amen. Glory to Thee our God ..., Heavenly King ..., Holy God ..., 
Our Father.  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Reader: Lord Have Mercy (12 times)..., Glory ..., Both now ..., O come let us 
worship ..., Then:  
PSALM 50 
Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me 
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine 
iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and 
done this evil before Thee, that Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and 
prevail when Thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in 
sins did my mother bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and 
secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt 
sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; 
the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my sins, 
and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy 
Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy 
governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the 
ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, 
Thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O 
Lord, Thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if 
Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou 
shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is 

--- PAGE 13 ---
broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy good 
pleasure unto Zion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt Thou 
be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt 
offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.  
PSALM 69 
O God, be attentive unto helping me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Let 
them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned 
back and brought to shame that desire evils against me. Let them be turned 
back straightway in shame that say unto me: Well done! Well done! Let them be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all that seek after Thee, O God, and let them that love 
Thy salvation say continually: The Lord be magnified. But as for me, I am poor 
and needy; O God come unto mine aid. My helper and my deliverer art Thou, 
O Lord; make no long tarrying.  
PSALM 142 
O Lord, hear my prayer; give ear unto my supplication in Thy truth; hearken 
unto me in Thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment with Thy servant, 
for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified. For the enemy hath persecuted 
my soul; he hath humbled my life down to the earth. He hath sat me in 
darkness as those that have been long dead, and my spirit within me is become 
despondent; within me my heart is troubled. I remembered days of old, I 
meditated on all Thy works, I pondered on the creations of Thy hands. I 
stretched forth my hands unto Thee; my soul thirsteth after Thee like a 
waterless land. Quickly hear me, O Lord; my spirit hath fainted away. Turn not 
Thy face away from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 
Cause me to hear Thy mercy in the morning; for in Thee have I put my hope. 
Cause me to know, O Lord, the way wherein I should walk; for unto Thee have 
I lifted up my soul. Rescue me from mine enemies, O Lord; unto Thee have I 
fled for refuge. Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. Thy good Spirit 
shall lead me in the land of uprightness; for Thy name’s sake, O Lord, shalt 
Thou quicken me. In Thy righteousness shalt Thou bring my soul out of 
affliction, and in Thy mercy shalt Thou utterly destroy mine enemies. And Thou 
shalt cut off all them that afflict my soul, for I am Thy servant.  
THE DOXOLOGY 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace and good will among men. 
We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we give 
thanks to Thee for Thy great glory. O Lord, heavenly King, God the Father 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Almighty; O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ; and O Holy Spirit. O 
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that takest away the sin of the 
world; have mercy on us; Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive 
our prayer; Thou that sittest at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us. 
For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord, O Jesus Christ, to the glory of 
God the Father. Amen. Every night will I bless Thee, and I will praise Thy 
Name forever, yea, forever and forever. Lord, thou hast been our refuge in 
generation and generation. I said: O Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul, for 
I have sinned against Thee. O Lord, unto Thee have I fled for refuge, teach me 
to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. For in Thee is the fountain of life, in Thy 
light shall we see light. O continue Thy mercy unto them that know Thee. 
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this night without sin. Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord, the God of our Fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the 
ages. Amen. Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped 
in Thee. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me Thy statutes.. Blessed art Thou, O 
Master, give me understanding of Thy statutes. Blessed art Thou, O Holy One, 
enlighten me by Thy statutes. O Lord, Thy mercy endureth forever; disdain not 
the works of Thy hands. To Thee is due praise, to Thee is due a song, to Thee 
glory is due, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, Now and 
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
THE SYMBOL OF FAITH 
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and 
of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
the Only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true 
God of true God; begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by 
Whom all things were made; Who for us men and for our salvation came down 
from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, 
and became man; And was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered 
and was buried; And arose again on the third day according to the Scriptures; 
And ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; And 
shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living and the dead; Whose 
kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life; 
Who proceedeth from the Father; Who with the Father and the Son together is 
worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. In One, Holy, Catholic, 
and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins. I look 
for the resurrection of the dead, And the life of the age to come. Amen.  
Then immediately:  

--- PAGE 15 ---
It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, ever blessed and most 
blameless, and Mother of our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and 
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, who without corruption 
gavest birth to God the Word, the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
After which we chant the second stasis of the Akathist Hymn: 
Canon to the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Beholding thee, the living book of Christ, sealed by the Spirit, the great 
archangel exclaimed to thee, O pure one: Rejoice, vessel of joy, through which 
the curse of the first mother is annulled.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, Virgin bride of God, restoration of Adam and the death of Hades. 
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, palace of the King of all. Rejoice, fiery throne of 
the Almighty.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, O thou who alone hast blossomed forth the unfading Rose. 
Rejoice, for thou hast borne the fragrant Apple. Rejoice, Maiden unwedded, the 
pure fragrance of the only King, and preservation of the world.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, treasure-house of purity, by which we have risen from our fall. 
Rejoice, sweet-smelling lily which perfumeth the faithful, fragrant incense and 
most precious myrrh.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee, the untilled field, hath grown the divine Ear of grain. Rejoice, 
living table that hath held the Bread of Life. Rejoice, O Lady, never-failing 
spring of the Living Water.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
O Heifer that bearest the unblemished Calf for the faithful, rejoice!, Ewe 
that hast brought forth the lamb of God, Who taketh away the sins of all the 
world. Rejoice, ardent mercy-seat.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice brightest dawn, who alone bearest Christ the Sun. Rejoice, dwelling-
place of Light, who hast dispersed darkness and utterly driven away the gloomy 
demons.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, only portal through which the Word alone hath passed. By thy 
birthgiving, O Lady, thou hast broken the bars and gates of Hades. Rejoice, 
Bride of God, divine entry of the saved.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus 
the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he 
hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
With voices of song in faith we cry aloud to thee, who art worthy of all 
praise: Rejoice, butter mountain, mountain curdled by the Spirit. Rejoice, 
candlestick and vessel of manna, which sweeteneth the senses of all the pious.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, mercy-seat of the world, most pure Lady. Rejoice, ladder raising all 
from the earth by grace. Rejoice, bridge that in very truth hast led from death to 
life all those who hymn thee.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, higher than the heavens, who didst painlessly carry 
within thy womb the Fountain of the earth. Rejoice, sea-shell that with thy 
blood didst dye a divine purple robe for the King of Hosts.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, Lady who in truth didst give birth to the lawgiver, Who freely 
washed clean the iniquities of all. O Maiden who hast not known wedlock, 
unfathomable depth, unutterable height, by whom we have been deified.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Praising thee who hast woven for the world a Crown not made by the hand 
of man, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, the guardian of all mankind, fortress 
and rampart, and sacred refuge.  
ODE V 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God 
of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all 
who hymn thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, who hast given birth to the Way of life, and 
who didst save the world from the flood of sin. Rejoice, Bride of God, tidings 
fearful to tell and hear. Rejoice, dwelling-place of the Master of all creation.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, the strength and fortress of all, sanctuary of glory, 
the death of Hades, most radiant bridal chamber. Rejoice, joy of angels. Rejoice, 
helper of those who pray to thee with faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Lady, fiery chariot of the Word, living paradise, having in thy 
midst the Tree of Life, the Lord of Life, Whose sweetness vivifieth all who 
partake of Him with faith, though they have been subject to corruption.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Strengthened by thy might, we raise our cry to thee with faith: Rejoice, city 
of the King of all, of which things glorious and worthy to be heard were clearly 
spoken. Rejoice, unhewn mountain, unfathomed depth.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, all-pure one, spacious tabernacle of the Word, shell which 
produced the divine Pearl. Rejoice, all-wondrous Theotokos, who dost reconcile 
with God all who ever call thee blessed.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * 
O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
O undefiled bridal chamber of the Word, cause of deification for all, rejoice, 
all-honorable preaching of the prophet; rejoice, adornment of the apostles.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee hath come the Dew that extinguished the flame of idolatry; 
therefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, living fleece wet with dew, which Gideon saw 
of old, O Virgin.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Behold, to thee, O Virgin, we cry: Rejoice! Be thou the port and a haven for 
all that sail upon the troubled waters of affliction, amidst all the snares of the 
enemy.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Thou cause of joy, endue our thoughts with grace, that we may cry to thee: 
Rejoice, unconsumed bush, cloud of light that unceasingly overshadoweth the 
faithful.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We sing of thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, chariot of the noetic Sun; true vine, 
that hast produced ripe grapes, from which floweth a wine making glad the 
souls of those who glorify thee in faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Bride of God, who hast given birth to the Healer of all; thou 
mystical staff, that didst blossom with the unfading Flower. Rejoice, O Lady, 
through whom we are filled with joy and inherited life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
No tongue, however eloquent, hath power to sing thy praises, O Lady; for 
thou art exalted above the seraphim, having given birth to Christ the King, 
Whom do thou beseech to deliver from all harm those that venerate thee in 
faith.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
The ends of the earth praise thee and call thee blessed, and they cry to thee 
with love: Rejoice, pure scroll, upon which the Word was written by the finger 
of the Father. Do thou beseech Him to inscribe thy servants in the book of life, 
O Theotokos.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
We thy servants pray to thee and bend the knees of our hearts: Incline thine 
ear, O pure one; save thy servants who are always sinking, and preserve thy city 
from every enemy captivity, O Theotokos.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Within thy womb thou hast received the Word; thou hast carried Him who 
carrieth all; O pure one, thou hast fed with milk Him Who by His beck feedeth 
the whole world. To Him we sing: Sing to the Lord, all ye His works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Moses perceived in the burning bush the great mystery of thy childbearing, 
while the youths clearly prefigured it as they stood in the midst of the fire and 
were not consumed, O Virgin pure and inviolate. Therefore do we hymn thee 
and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We who once through falsehood were stripped naked, have been clothed in 
the robe of incorruption by thy childbearing; and we who once sat in the 
darkness of sin have seen the light, O Maiden, dwelling-place of Light. 
Therefore we hymn thee, and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Through thee the dead are brought to life, for thou hast borne the 
Hypostatic Life. They who once were mute are now made to speak well; lepers 
are cleansed, diseases are driven out, the hosts of the spirits of the air are 
conquered, O Virgin, the salvation of mankind.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Thou didst bear the salvation of the world, O pure one, and through thee 
we were raised from earth to heaven. Rejoice, all-blessed, protection and 
strength, rampart and fortress of those who sing: O all ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the 
holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us, the faithful, call to thee: Rejoice! Through thee, O Maiden, we have 
become partakers of everlasting joy. Save us from temptations, from barbarian 
captivity, and from every other injury that befalleth the sinful because of the 
multitude of their transgressions.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Thou hast appeared as our enlightenment and confirmation; wherefore, we 
cry to thee: Rejoice, never-setting star that hast brought the great Sun into the 
world. Rejoice, pure Virgin who hast opened the closed Eden. Rejoice, pillar of 
fire, leading mankind to a higher life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us stand with reverence in the house of our God, and let us cry aloud: 
Rejoice, Sovereign Lady of the world. Rejoice, Mary, Sovereign Lady of us all. 
Rejoice, thou who alone art immaculate and fair among women. Rejoice, vessel 
that receivedst the inexhaustible myrrh poured out upon thee.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Thou dove that hast borne the Merciful One, rejoice, ever-virgin! Rejoice, 
glory of all the saints. Rejoice, crown of martyrs. Rejoice, divine adornment of 
all the righteous and salvation of us the faithful.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Spare Thine inheritance, O God, and overlook all our sins now, for as an 
intercessor in Thy sight, O Christ, Thou hast her who on earth gave birth to 
Thee without seed, when in Thy great mercy Thou didst will to take the form of 
a man.  
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion: in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: * Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
(After this, is sung the stasis which corresponds to the week of Great Lent) 
The Second Stasis  
IKOS IV  
While the angels were chanting, the shepherds heard of Christ’s coming in 
the flesh, and having run to the Shepherd, they beheld Him as a blameless 
Lamb that had been pastured in Mary’s womb, and singing to Her, they cried:  
Rejoice; Mother of the Lamb and the Shepherd:  
Rejoice; Fold of rational sheep!  
Rejoice; Torment of invisible enemies:  
Rejoice; Opening of the gates of Paradise!  
Rejoice; For the things of Heaven rejoice with the earth:  
Rejoice; For the things of earth join chorus with the heavens!  
Rejoice; Never-silent mouth of the Apostles:  
Rejoice; Invincible courage of the passion-bearers!  
Rejoice; Firm support of faith:  
Rejoice; Radiant token of Grace!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom Hades was stripped bare:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom we are clothed with glory!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION V  
Having sighted the divinely-moving star, the Magi followed its radiance; and 
holding it as a lamp, by it they sought a powerful King; and having reached the 
Unreachable One, they rejoiced, shouting to Him: Alleluia! 
IKOS V  
The sons of the Chaldees saw in the hands of the Virgin Him Who with His 
hand made man. And knowing Him to be the Master, even though He had 
taken the form of a servant, they hastened to serve Him with gifts, and to cry to 
Her Who is blessed:  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Rejoice; Mother of the Unsetting Star:  
Rejoice; Dawn of the mystic day!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst extinguish the furnace of error:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst enlighten the initiates of the Trinity!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst banish from power the inhuman tyrant:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst show us Christ the Lord, the Lover of mankind!  
Rejoice; Thou Who redeemest from pagan worship:  
Rejoice; Thou Who dost drag us from the works of mire!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst quench the worship of fire:  
Rejoice; Thou Who rescuest from the flame of the passions!  
Rejoice; Guide of the faithful to chastity:  
Rejoice; Gladness of all generations!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION VI  
Having become God-bearing heralds, the Magi returned to Babylon, having 
fulfilled Thy prophecy; and having preached Thee to all as the Christ, they left 
Herod as a babbler who knew not how to sing: Alleluia! 
IKOS VI  
By shining in Egypt the light of truth, Thou didst dispel the darkness of 
falsehood; for its idols fell, O Savior, unable to endure Thy strength; and those 
who were delivered from them cried to the Theotokos:  
Rejoice; Uplifting of men:  
Rejoice; Downfall of demons!  
Rejoice; Thou who didst trample down the dominion of delusion:  
Rejoice; Thou who didst unmask the fraud of idols!  
Rejoice; Sea that didst drown the Pharaoh of the mind:  
Rejoice; Rock that doth refresh those thirsting for life!  
Rejoice; Pillar of fire that guideth those in darkness:  
Rejoice; Shelter of the world broader than a cloud!  
Rejoice; Sustenance replacing manna:  
Rejoice; Minister of holy delight!  
Rejoice; Land of promise:  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Rejoice; Thou from whom floweth milk and honey!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION VII  
When Symeon was about to depart this age of delusion, Thou wast brought 
as a Babe to him, but Thou wast recognized by him as perfect God also; 
wherefore, marveling at Thine ineffable wisdom, he cried: Alleluia! 
Then the Choir chanteth the first Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: Rejoice, Thou Bride Unwedded!  
Reader: Holy God ..., Our Father ...,  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...  
Then the Kontakion of the holy martyrs; in Tone VIII: 
 To Thee, the Planter of creation, * the world doth offer the God-bearing 
martyrs as the first-fruits of nature. * By their supplications, preserve Thy 
Church in perfect peace, ** through the Theotokos, O greatly-Merciful One.  
Reader: Lord, have mercy (40 times).  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners, Who callest all to salvation through the promise of good things to 
come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy 
commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our 
thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. 
Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided by their array, 
we may attain to the unity of the faith and the knowledge of Thine 
unapproachable glory; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Reader: Lord have mercy. (Thrice), Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father (Master) bless! 
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our 
God, have mercy on us. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Reader: Amen, Lord have mercy (12 Times), Save, help, and protect us, O 
Virgin Theotokos. 
The Supplicatory Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos: 
O undefiled, untainted, uncorrupted, most pure, chaste Virgin, Thou Bride 
of God and Sovereign Lady, who didst unite the Word of God to mankind 
through thy most glorious birth giving, and hast linked the apostate nature of 
our race with the heavenly; O Thou who art the only hope of the hopeless, and 
the helper of the struggling, the ever-ready protection of them that hasten unto 
thee, and the refuge of all Orthodox Christians: Shrink not with loathing from 
me a sinner, defiled as I am, and who with polluted thoughts, words, and deeds 
have made myself utterly unprofitable, and through slothfulness of mind have 
become a slave to the pleasures of life. But do thou as the Mother of God Who 
lovest mankind, show thy love for mankind and mercifully have compassion 
upon me a sinner and prodigal, and accept my supplication, which is offered 
unto thee out of my defiled mouth; and making use of thy motherly boldness, 
entreat thy Son and our Master and Lord that He may be pleased to open for 
me the bowels of His loving-kindness and graciousness to mankind, and, 
disregarding my numberless offenses, may He turn me back to repentance, and 
show me to be a tried worker of His precepts. And be thou ever present unto 
me as merciful, compassionate and well disposed; in the present life be thou a 
fervent intercessor and helper, repelling the assaults of adversaries and guiding 
me to salvation, and at the time of my departure taking care of my miserable 
soul, and driving far away from it the dark countenances of evil demons; lastly, 
at the dreadful day of judgment delivering me from eternal torment, show me 
to be an heir of the ineffable glory of thy Son and our God; all of which may I 
attain, O my Sovereign Lady, most holy Theotokos, by virtue of thine 
intercessions and protection, through the grace and love to mankind of thine 
only begotten Son, our Lord and God and Savior, Jesus Christ, to Whom is due 
all glory, honor and worship, together with His beginningless Father, and His 
Most Holy and good and life creating Spirit, Now and ever, and unto ages of 
ages. Amen.  
A Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, by Antiochus the monk: 
And grant unto us, O Master, in the coming sleep, rest for body and soul, 
and preserve us from the gloomy slumber of sin, and from every dark and 
nocturnal sensuality. Subdue the impulses of passions, extinguish the fiery darts 
of the evil one that are cunningly hurled against us, assuage the rebellions of our 
flesh, and every earthly and fleshly subtlety of ours lull to sleep. And grant unto 
us, O God, a watchful mind, chaste thought, a sober heart, a sleep gentle and 

--- PAGE 25 ---
free from every satanic illusion. Raise us up at the time of prayer firmly 
grounded in Thy judgments. All the night long grant us a doxology, that we may 
hymn and bless and glorify Thy most honorable and majestic name: of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Now and ever, and unto the ages 
of ages. Amen.  
Most glorious, Ever-Virgin, Mother of Christ God, present our prayer to 
thy Son and our God, that through thee, He may save our souls. 
My hope is the Father, my refuge is the Son, my protection is the Holy 
Spirit: O Holy Trinity, glory to Thee. 
All my hope I place in thee, O Mother of God: keep me under thy 
protection. 
In Thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice, the ranks of Angels and 
the race of mankind; O all-hallowed Temple and spiritual Paradise, boast of 
Virgins. For from thee God became incarnate and He who is our God before 
the ages became a child. He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it 
wider than the heavens. In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; glory 
be to thee. 
A Prayer to the Guardian Angel: 
O holy angel that standeth by my wretched soul and my passionate life, 
forsake not me a sinner, nor shrink from me because of mine intemperance. 
Give no place for the cunning demon to master me through the violence of my 
mortal body, strengthen my poor and feeble hand, and guide me in the way of 
salvation. Yea, O holy angel of God, guardian and protector of my wretched 
soul and body, forgive me all wherein I have offended thee all the days of my 
life; and if I have sinned in anything this day, protect me during this present 
night, and guard me from every temptation of the enemy, that I may not anger 
God by any sin. And pray to the Lord for me, that he may establish me in His 
fear, and show me, His servant, to be worthy of His goodness. Amen. 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory to Thee. 
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Lord, have mercy. (Thrice), father, bless. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Priest: May Christ our true God, by the prayers of His most pure Mother, of 
our holy and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and 
save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind. 
Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Bless, holy fathers (mothers, brothers and sisters) and forgive me a 
sinner, all wherein I have sinned this day in deed, word, and thought, and by all 
my senses.  
And the brethren (sisters/congregation) reply: 
May God forgive and have mercy on thee, holy father. 
And they make a prostration, asking this forgiveness: 
Bless me, holy father, and forgive all wherein I have sinned this day in deed, 
word, and thought, and by all my senses, and pray for me a sinner. 
Priest: Through His grace may God forgive and have mercy on us all. 
Choir: Amen. 
And the Priest saith this Ektinia: 
Priest: Let us pray for the Orthodox episcopate of the (Jurisdiction) Church; 
for our lord the Very Most Reverend (Patriarch/Metropolitan/Archbishop) 
(Name), First Hierarch of the (Jurisdiction) Church; for our lord the Most 
Reverend (Metropolitan/Archbishop/Bishop N., whose diocese it is) and all 
our brethren in Christ. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (Repeated slowly and with compunction) 
Priest: For the suffering Russian land and its Orthodox people both in the 
homeland and in the diaspora, and for their salvation; for this land, its 
authorities and armed forces, and for every Christian land. 
Priest: For them that hate us and them that love us. 
Priest: For them that are kind to us and them that serve us. 
Priest: For them that have asked us unworthy ones to pray for them. 
Priest: For the deliverance of the imprisoned. 
Priest: For our fathers and brethren that have passed on before us. 
Priest: For those sailing upon the sea. 
Priest: For those bedridden in infirmities. 
Priest: Let us pray for the abundance of the fruits of the earth. 
Priest: And for every Orthodox Christian soul. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Priest: Let us bless pious kings (rulers), Orthodox hierarchs, and the 
founders of this holy habitation. 
Priest: For Our parents, and all that have passed on before us, our fathers, 
brethren, and the for the Orthodox here and everywhere laid to rest. 
Priest: Let us say also for ourselves. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (Thrice) 
Then the following Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy 
purity, * Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of 
praise can I offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? I am in doubt and 
stand in awe. * Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of 
Grace.  
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our 
God, have mercy on us. 
Choir: Amen. 
 
 
 
