--- PAGE 1 ---
ON SATURDAY IN THE SECOND WEEK 
AT MATINS  
After the six Psalms and the great Litany, we chant Alleluia (Thrice): 
In Tone II, 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their memorial is unto generation and generation. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their souls shall dwell among good things (Alleluia x3) 
Then the following Troparion in Tone II: 
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, and hierarchs, * venerable monastics and 
righteous men and women, * ye kept the faith, having fought the good fight to 
the end, * since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, ** we beseech 
you, to pray to Him that our souls be saved. 
For the Reposed; Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Remember Thy servants O Lord, * and in Thy love forgive them all their 
transgressions committed in this life, * for there is none sinless but Thee, O 
Lord ** who hast the power to grant rest to the departed. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O holy Mother of the ineffable Light: * we reverently magnify thee, ** 
honoring thee with angelic hymns.  
After the first chanting of the Psalter (the Sixteenth Kathisma) we chant the Sessional 
Hymns of the holy martyrs, in the Tone of the Week. Then the reader begins the Seventeenth 
Kathisma (Psalm 118): 
Verse: Blessed are those that are blameless in the way, who walk in the 
law of the Lord. 
Verse: Blessed are they that search out His testimonies, and seek Him 
with their whole heart. 
And so the reader continues with the first half of the Kathisma down to verse 91; and as 
he reads the Choir chants softly without pause: 
Tone V: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; 
 
When the reader hath said verse 91, the Choir chants Thrice the two following verses: 
Verse: If Thy law had not been my meditation, then should I have 
perished in my humiliation.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: I will never forget Thy statutes, for in them Thou hast quickened 
me. 
Then the small Litany for the Reposed:  
Priest/Deacon: Again and Again ..., 
After this the reader continues with the second half of the Seventeenth Kathisma: I am 
Thine, save me..., while the Choir chants softly without pause:  
Tone V: Save me, O Savior. 
The reader continues to verse 174, and the Choir chants Thrice the II Concluding verses: 
Verse: My soul shall live, and shall praise Thee: and Thy judgments will 
help me. 
Verse: I have gone astray like a lost sheep: O seek Thy servant, for I have 
not forgotten Thy commandments. 
The choir then sings the Evlogitaria of the Reposed, in Tone V: 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
The Choir of the Saints hath found the Fountain of Life * and the Door of 
Paradise. * May I also find the way through repentance. * I am the lost sheep, 
call me, O Savior, and save me. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Ye that have preached the Lamb of God, * and like lambs were slain, O holy 
ones, * translated unto life that ageth not and is everlasting, * fervently entreat 
Him, O ye martyrs, * to grant us forgiveness of our sins 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Ye that have trod the narrow way of sorrow; * all ye that in life have taken 
up the Cross as a yoke, * and have followed Me in faith, * come, enjoy the 
honors and heavenly crowns * which I have prepared for you. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
I am an image of Thine ineffable glory, * though I bear the wounds of sin; * 
take compassion on Thy creature, O Master, * and cleanse me by Thy loving-
kindness; * and grant me the longed-for fatherland, * making me again a citizen 
of paradise. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
O Thou Who of old didst fashion me out of nothing, * and didst honor me 
with Thine image divine, * but because of my transgression of Thy 
commandment * didst return me again unto the earth, from which I was taken: 
* Restore to me again Thy likeness, ** that I may be refashioned in that former 
beauty. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Grant rest, O God, to the souls of Thy servants, * and commit them to 
paradise, * where the choirs of the Saints O Lord, * and of the righteous shine 
as luminaries; * Grant rest, unto Thy departed servants, * overlooking all their 
transgressions. 
Glory ..., The triple radiance of the one Godhead * let us piously hymn, 
crying aloud: * Holy art Thou, O beginningless Father, * co-beginningless Son, 
and Divine Spirit; * Do Thou enlighten us Who with faith Worship Thee ** and 
snatch us from the eternal fire. 
 Both now ..., Rejoice, O thou pure one, Who hast given birth to God in the 
flesh * for the salvation of all, * and through Whom mankind hath found 
salvation; * through thee may We find paradise, ** O Theotokos, pure and 
blessed. 
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany for the Reposed:  
Priest/Deacon: Again and Again ..., 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Grant rest, O our Savior, with the righteous * unto Thy servants, * and settle 
them in Thy courts, * as it is written, overlooking, as Thou art good, * their 
transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, * and all that they have committed 
either in knowledge or in ignorance, * O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., O Christ God, Who didst shine forth unto the world 
* from the Virgin, * manifesting through her the sons of light, * have mercy on 
us. 
Then Psalm 50. 
The Canons 
Up to and including ODE V, we chant the canon/s from the Menaion, 
with 6 Troparia (including the Irmos), and the Temple’s patronymic 
canon with 4 Troparia. Starting at ODE VI we omit the patronymic 
canon, and use only the first canon from the Menaion with 6 Troparia 
and then the following two four-canticled (ODES 6,7,8, and 9) canons 
from the Triodion, with 8 Troparia. 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI  
By Joseph, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the Lord, * and to Him will I 
proclaim my grief; * for my soul is filled with evils, * and my life unto 
Hades hath drawn nigh, * and like Jonah I pray unto Thee: * Raise me 
up from corruption, O God. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Because of the many torments that they suffered, the saints were deemed 
worthy to overthrow a multitude of the enemy, and they received, O Savior, 
many blessings from Thee. By their intercessions, since Thou art good, wash 
me clean from the multitude of my sins. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Let us with one accord sing the praises of the passion-bearers of Christ, and 
let us cry out to them: O ye followers of Christ’s Passion, heal the passions of 
our souls and grant us strength to abstain from evil. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Sleeping in the tomb, Thou didst transform the sorrow of death into sleep, 
and thereby grant life to the departed. O Savior, deem those who have departed 
from us, worthy of a place with Thine elect, by the prayers of Thy passion-
bearers. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Ineffably, O Maiden, hast thou given birth to Him who is all-
powerful and sinless, the Word made flesh: grant unto me the strength to fast 
and to abstain from every sin; and grant me tears O undefiled One, that I may 
wash away the filth of sin. 
Another Canon by Theodore, in Tone III: 
Irmos: The abyss of the passions ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Come, all ye who love the martyrs, let us celebrate their memory, and 
rejoicing let us crown them with our hymns and bless Christ who hath rewarded 
them. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
First ye were scourged, then stoned, or sawn asunder, or given over to wild 
beasts. Ye were slaughtered as sheep for Christ, but ye live unto the ages, O 
victorious passion-bearers. 
Glory ..., I unite Three in the one Nature of the Godhead, and divide the 
One into three Hypostases; and I reject equally the opposing heresies of Sibelius 
and Arius.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou wast revealed to be a virgin before and 
after conception, remaining pure, yet giving birth. Strange is the mystery that is 
revealed in thee, O Mother of God, transcending description and all 
understanding. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the Martyrs: O martyrs, the blood of your patient suffering ever 
intercedeth for us before the Lord. Pray for us now, that we may abstain from 
shameful passions. 
Refrain: Their souls shall dwell among good things. 
 For the reposed: O all-merciful One, Who shalt come again to judge the 
whole world in the presence of thousands of Thine angels, deem those who 
have fallen asleep in faith, worthy to stand before Thee uncondemned. 
Katavasia: The abyss of the passions and a storm of adverse winds * have 
risen up against me. * But do Thou make haste, O Savior, * to save me, 
and deliver me from corruption, * as Thou didst deliver the Prophet from 
the sea-monster. 
The small Litany for the reposed 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII; 
With the Saints grant rest, * O Christ, to the souls of Thy servants, * in a 
place where there is neither * pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, * but life 
everlasting. 
Ikos: Thou alone art immortal, * Who hast created and fashioned man; * 
but We mortals were fashioned from the earth, * and unto earth shall we return, 
* as Thou Who fashioned me didst command and say unto me, * “For earth 
thou art and unto earth shall thou return,” * whither all We mortals are going, * 
making our funeral lament the song: ** Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
ODE VII 
The first canon, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: The Hebrew children in the furnace * boldly trampled upon the 
flames, * changing the fire into dew, they cried aloud: * “Blessed art 
Thou, O Lord our God, throughout the ages.”  

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O most glorious passion-bearers of the Lord, by your blood ye quenched 
the flames of deception, pray to Christ, that we be delivered from the future 
fire. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O passion-bearers, ye stopped the mouths of lions and endured the fire of 
torture, and now, having been granted the true joys of heaven, pray that we also 
may partake of this joy throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O ye brave passion-bearers, illumined by the fullness of the Spirit’s light, 
pray that the departed faithful repose in peace, and entering into Paradise, 
partake of life. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: I bring a hymn unto thee, O pure Virgin, for I am held fast by 
evil: turn not away from me, but grant me perfect amendment through fasting 
and a proper way of life. 
Another canon, in Tone III: 
Irmos: Thou didst bedew the flame ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Fire and sword, and wild beasts did ye count as a joy, O passion-bearers, 
filling your executioners with amazement, chanting praises to the God of our 
fathers. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Cut in pieces and burnt, O martyrs, ye were offered as a fragrant sacrifice to 
Christ: ever intercede with Him on our behalf.  
Glory ..., I glorify one God in Trinity, the Father, Son and Spirit, simple 
Unity, a Holy Trinity, a beginningless Source, one in Essence. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: All-holy Lady Theotokos, accept the prayers of 
thy servants and bring them to the God of all, that He save us from every 
temptation. 
Refrain: In the Saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous. 
To the Martyrs: O company of martyrs, descend from heaven to aid us; 
bless and sanctify us as we hymn your praises, that with willing hearts we 
complete the season of the Fast. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Refrain: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
 For the reposed: O God, who knowest the works of man, forgive the 
voluntary and involuntary sins of the faithful who have departed to dwell with 
Thee, and grant them rest. 
Katavasia: Thou didst bedew the flame of the furnace * and save the 
Children from being consumed: * blessed art Thou throughout the ages, 
* O Lord the God of our fathers. 
ODE VIII 
The first canon, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: By Thy grace the children became vanquishers * of both the 
tyrant and the flames, * carefully observing Thy commandments, * 
wherefore they cried aloud: * Bless the Lord, all ye works of the Lord!  
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
After enduring a multitude of torments in the weakness of your body, O 
passion-bearers, you have been revealed as physicians of the infirm, wherefore I 
cry aloud: through repentance heal my ailing soul, during the season of the Fast. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Alas! How all my days have passed by in laziness, and the end draweth near. 
O martyrs, who fought the good fight and finished the course, pray for me, that 
I may have a blessed end. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
With the drops of your blood ye quenched the fire of godlessness, O divine 
passion-bearers: pray on behalf of those who have departed this life, that God 
grant them eternal rest and the remission of their sins. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Ezekiel saw thee, O pure One, as the gate through which none 
may pass; but thou dost open the gates of repentance unto all who despair; 
wherefore I entreat thee; open unto me the gates that lead to never-ending 
peace. 
Another canon, in Tone III: 
Irmos: He who was begotten of God ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Ye endured many and various bitter torments: some were burnt, others 
sawn asunder or cut into pieces. But now ye rejoice, O passion-bearers, 
chanting unto Christ: “Praise ye, bless ye, and supremely exalt Him throughout 
all ages.” 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
By your blood you sanctified the ends of the earth, gushing forth healing 
unto all, O all-praised martyrs, continually crying aloud: “Praise ye, bless ye, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
O Unity in three Hypostases, the Father, Son and living Spirit, one Godhead 
and one Kingdom; The hosts of angels glorify Thee as the never-waning Light; 
and we on earth praise, bless and supremely exalt Thee throughout all ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Behold, seeing the great things that have been 
wrought in thee, all generations call thee blessed O most pure One. For in a 
manner transcending nature thou didst bear the Creator of all, who is both God 
and man. Wherefore we bless and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the Martyrs: O choir of passion-bearers, beseech the Savior that we may 
be saved, and that through abstinence we may offer Him worthy service. Praise 
ye, bless ye, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Their souls shall dwell among good things. 
 For the reposed: O Lord, count those who have fallen asleep in the hope of 
the resurrection, worthy to awaken to life eternal; that they may magnify Thee 
in sincerity and offer Thee this psalm of glory: “Praise ye, bless ye, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: He who was begotten of God the father before all ages, * and 
in these later times assumed flesh from the Theotokos, * as both perfect 
man and truly God, * praise ye, bless ye, * and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
The first canon, in Tone VIII 
Irmos: Thou hast passed the limits of nature, * having conceived the 
Maker and the Lord, * and didst become a door of salvation * unto the 
world; * wherefore we unceasingly magnify thee, O Theotokos. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
O brave passion-bearers, likened to divine coals, you burn up the evil nature 
of godlessness. For having cut down the hordes of demons with the sword of 
your confession, you render our souls radiant. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O brave passion-bearers, having passed through the darkness of torment ye 
dwell now in the noetic light: Therefore enlighten my humble soul darkened by 
transgressions. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
The most glorious passion-bearers endured pain inflicted on their bodies; 
and now intercede on behalf of the faithful departed, entreating Him that they 
may enjoy a painless repose and the delight of Paradise. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O pure Lady, during the season of abstinence, thou hast been 
manifest as a divine helper of thine unworthy servants, bring our prayers before 
the Lord and King of all the ages. 
Another canon, in Tone III: 
Irmos: Unto thee who art the immortal fountain ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O passion-bearers of Christ, like unto fire sent down by God upon the 
earth, you have burnt up the delusion of idolatry and kindled the light of true 
faith in the farthest regions of the earth. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Neither flame nor slaughter, nor wheel nor rack, nor catapult nor saw, nor 
any other torture, no matter how bitter, could separate you from the love of 
Christ, O holy passion-bearers. 
Glory ..., With true veneration I praise the Godhead, one in three, united in 
Essence yet distinct in Hypostases, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit - which are a 
Unity. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou didst give birth to the Rod from the root 
of Jesse and of the forefather David: we magnify thee, O most immaculate and 
pure One, for thou hast saved our souls. 
Refrain: In the Saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
To the Martyrs: O honored multitude of martyrs, pray to Christ on our 
behalf, that we complete the course of the Fast in peace, and behold and 
worship His Passion. 
Refrain: Blessed are they Whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
 For the reposed: As God of the living and the dead, who didst slay death, 
and by Thine Arising grant life unto all; grant rest, O Christ, to Thy departed 
servants. 
Katavasia: Unto thee who art the immortal fountain, * through whom the 
saints grant healing unto all mankind: * thee do we magnify, O pure 
Virgin, * for thou dost save our souls. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos (Twice). Then the 
following: 
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
As Thou art God Who hast authority over both the living and the dead, * 
grant rest to Thy servants in the dwelling-place of the elect, * for though they 
have sinned, O Savior, ** yet they turned not away from Thee. 
Both now ..., 
Sweetness of Angels, joy of those who sorrow, * Mediatress of Christians, * 
and Virgin mother of the Lord, ** help us, and deliver us from eternal torment. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera to the Martyrs (From the Oktoechos in the 
Tone of the week - see the Addendum). 
Glory ..., (From the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week): 
 Both now ..., Theotokion (From the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week):  
The Litany: Let us complete ..., 
On the Aposticha:  
We chant the Stichera of the reposed by Theophanes, in the Tone of the 
Week (See the Addendum): Glory ..., for the dead in the Tone of the 
week: Both now ..., Theotokion, for the dead in the Tone of the week:  
Then: 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
The Troparion, in Tone II: 
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, and hierarchs, * venerable monastics and 
righteous men and women, * ye kept the faith, having fought the good fight to 
the end, * since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, ** we beseech 
you, to pray to Him that our souls be saved. 
For the reposed; Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Remember Thy servants O Lord, * and in Thy love forgive them all their 
transgressions committed in this life, * for there is none sinless but Thee, O 
Lord ** who hast the power to grant rest to the departed. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O holy Mother of the ineffable Light, * with angelic hymns ** we honor and 
magnify thee. 
The Litany: Have mercy ..., Then the usual Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes we chant 6 Troparia in the Tone of the week from the 
Oktoechos. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion, in Tone II: 
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, and hierarchs, * venerable monastics and 
righteous men and women, * ye kept the faith, having fought the good fight to 
the end, * since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, ** we beseech 
you, to pray to Him that our souls be saved. 
Another Troparion, in Tone II: 
Remember Thy servants O Lord, * and in Thy love forgive them all their 
transgressions committed in this life, * for there is none sinless but Thee, O 
Lord ** who hast the power to grant rest to the departed. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
With the Saints grant rest, * O Christ, to the souls of Thy servants, * in a 
place where there is neither * pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, ** but life 
everlasting. 
 Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
In thee we have a wall and a haven * and an intercessor acceptable to God, 
Whom thou didst bear, * O Theotokos unwedded, ** salvation of the faithful. 
Prokeimenon:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord and rejoice, * ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (3:12 – 16) 
Brethren: Take heed, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in 
departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is called 
To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For we are 
made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast 
unto the end; While it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your 
hearts, as in the provocation. For some, when they had heard, did provoke: 
howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
1ST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS (4:13-17) 
Brethren: I would not have you to be ignorant, concerning them which are 
asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. For if we believe 
that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God 
bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we 
which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them 
which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in 
Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we 
ever be with the Lord. 
 
Alleluia in Tone IV: The righteous cried and the Lord heard them, and 
He delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall 
deliver them out of them all. 
Alleluia in Tone VIII: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and 
taken to Thyself, O Lord, and their memorial is unto generation and 
generation. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (1: 35-44) 
At that time: It being the morning, rising up a great while before day, Jesus 
went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. And Simon and 
they that were with him followed after him. And when they had found him, 
they said unto him, All men seek for thee. And he said unto them, Let us go 
into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore came I forth. 
And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils. 
And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and 
saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And Jesus, moved with 
compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be 
thou clean. And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed 
from him, and he was cleansed. And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent 
him away; And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy 
way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which 
Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them. 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (5: 24-30) 
The Lord spake unto the Jews who came unto Him, saying: Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath 
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death 
unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. 
For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in 
himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is 
the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that 
are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the 
resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: 
and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the 
Father which hath sent me. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet 
for the upright. 
Communion verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and hast 
taken to Thyself, O Lord: and their memorial is unto generation and 
generation.  
Alleluia (Thrice). 
 
 
 
 
