--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 4th Kathisma, the 
Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week. After 
the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma V), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone VIII: 
With the fire of abstinence let us burn up the thorns of the passions, * and 
with the streams of our tears * let us extinguish the unquenchable flame; * and 
let us cry aloud unto Him who shall come to judge all the world: * O Savior and 
tenderly-compassionate Lord, * preserve us uncondemned * and grant us the 
forgiveness of sins. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O pure and blessed one, who art full of the grace of God, with the powers 
on High, the archangels and all the incorporeal ones, beseech Him Who was 
born from thee out of the loving-kindness of His compassions; that before the 
end He grant us forgiveness, the cleansing of our sins and amendment of life, 
that we may find mercy. 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VI), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone VIII: 
O holy and venerable Trinity, * as we enter now upon the third week of the 
Fast, * preserve us safe from harm and condemnation. * Count us worthy to 
pass through the time that yet remaineth, * fulfilling all Thy commandments; * 
that offering up our hymns of praise with a pure conscience, ** we may behold 
the glorious Resurrection. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Thou art the protection of the faithful, O Birthgiver of God, * the joy of the 
suffering, and comforter of those who mourn; * O all-pure Virgin, pray on our 
behalf to Him who was supra-naturally born from thy womb, * together with 
the angels and the principalities, * that in the hour of judgment ** we may be 
delivered from condemnation. 
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; For those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE I 
First canon, by Joseph in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Let us, O ye people, send up a hymn * unto our wondrous God * 
Who hath freed Israel from bondage, * chanting a hymn of victory * and 
crying aloud: * We sing unto Thee, O only Master. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
In Thy divine compassion, accept me in repentance. I have wasted my life 
like the Prodigal, but cry aloud to Thee: “I have sinned, and have no need of 
accusers; for I myself bring before Thee all my shameful deeds.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I have forsaken the food of angels, and like a beast, fed upon evil 
wickedness. But now that I have turned back, receive me as one of Thy hired 
servants, O heavenly Father. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O ye faithful, let us forsake the night of pleasures, and hasten to the light of 
truth, that we be deemed worthy to share in the radiant feast of joy. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, most holy Temple, the Fleece upon which the dew of 
God hath fallen, the sealed Fount of the waters of immortality. Preserve thy 
flock, O Lady, from the attacks of every enemy. 
Another canon, by Theodore in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Let us sing unto God ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
As of old Israel fasted for three days, so let us sanctify ourselves, O 
brethren, during the first three weeks of the Fast; let us draw near to the mount 
of prayer and, harkening to the divine voice, let us sing in praise of Christ. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Come, ye people, and strengthened by fasting like Samson, let us destroy the 
demon of gluttony, as he once destroyed the lion; but let us take heed lest the 
Delilah of our passions deceive us.  
Glory ..., Like the cherubim I sing Thy praises, O Holy Divinity: three 
Lights and one Light, one Life and three; God who begetteth, God the 
begotten, and the Spirit of Life proceeding from the Father. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice, joy of Eve: for through thy childbearing, 
O pure One, her sorrow hath ended. Rejoice, radiant cloud of the never-waning 
Light, from which Christ our God hath dawned forth.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
As David once armed himself with faith, so let us arm ourselves with 
humility; and as he overthrew Goliath, so let us overthrow our proud mind, and 
slay the hosts of sensual passions. 
Katavasia: Let us sing unto God, * who delivered Israel from the bitter 
bondage of Pharaoh, * guiding them with a pillar of fire and a cloud of 
light, * for He hath been glorified. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: Treading down the fiery flame in the furnace, * the divinely 
eloquent children sang: * “Bless the Lord, ye works of the Lord.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I have wasted the riches the Father hath given me with harlots, and have 
been cast out from the forecourt of grace; but receive me back, O Father, 
according to Thine immeasurable mercy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us shine with the effulgent radiance of prayer and fasting, and so escape 
from the darkness of sin. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The choir of the noetic powers doth entreat Thee, the cherubim pray to 
Thee together with the company of the saints: O greatly merciful Christ, save 
our souls. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Virgin Theotokos, who hast conceived the un-husbanded 
Vine, bring me who am darkened by the drunkenness of sin, back to sobriety, 
for thou art the hope of our souls. 
Second canon, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast covered ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Come O brethren, and let us delight in the Fast, for it is the Father’s 
treasury, a thing of wonder, and the mother of all who worship Christ the 
Master. It giveth strength to the body and enlighteneth the mind and heart. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Emulate the wondrous example of Gideon O my soul, and bearing as Thy 
weapons the three virtues of faith, hope and love for Christ, go out and slay the 
alien passions, as he did, conquering the people of Midiam with three hundred 
men. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
I glorify Thee as the Trinity, and I sing Thy praises as a single Unity: one 
Godhead, the almighty Father, the Sovereign Son, and the Holy Spirit; One 
Power ruling over all, one Nature, and one Kingdom, worshipped in three 
Hypostases. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: She who in a manner transcending nature 
escaped the pain of labor, Thy Mother, suffered at Thy Holy Passion, for she 
was overcome with agony upon seeing Thee willingly nailed upon the Cross by 
the Jews, O Thou who didst suspend the earth upon the waters. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
When Thou shalt come again in glory with thousands and ten thousands of 
Thy heavenly powers to judge all the earth O Lord, spare me then, forgive me, 
and deliver me from condemnation. Put me not to shame; condemn me not to 
the never-ending fire.  
Verse: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: O Thou Who hast covered Thy high places with the waters, * 
Who hast set the sands to bound the sea * and upholdest all things: * the 
sun singeth Thy praises, * the moon giveth Thee glory, * every creature 
offereth a hymn to Thee, * as the Fashioner of all, throughout the ages. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: The prophetic vision of the lawgiver on the mountain, * in the fire 
of the burning bush, * prefigured thy birthgiving O Ever-Virgin, * the 
salvation of us the faithful, * wherefore with never silent hymns we 
magnify thee. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O Father, I have departed far from Thy love, and have enslaved myself to 
sensual desires. But receive me now who hath returned to Thee, as did the 
Prodigal, for Thou alone art plenteous in mercy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
In my wretchedness I am like the withered fig tree, for the only fruit I have 
borne is wickedness; and I deserve to be cast into the fire. Show me to be 
fruitful O Lord, that I may offer Thee the fruit of my good actions. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, abstain from wickedness and evil; refrain from anger, wrath and 
every sin. For such is the fast desired by Jesus, the Lover of mankind.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou art our defense and rampart; thou art the 
help of those who flee to thee, and we implore thee now, that we be delivered 
from our enemies. 
Second canon, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: We magnify thee O undefiled One ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
As an acceptable gift let us offer to Christ God a pure fast and abstinence 
from evil.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, seeing how Elisha fed the prophets in the days of old, partake of 
whatever food there be, giving thanks to Christ. 
Glory ..., I sing Thy praises, O Godhead, one Form in three Hypostases, the 
beginningless Father, the Son, and the Spirit of Life. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Maiden, Mother of God, bridal chamber of 
Christ the heavenly King, save by thine intercessions those who praise thee with 
love. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Daniel in the lion’s den tamed the wild beasts with the muzzle of abstinence: 
let us also subdue the passions by fasting. 
Katavasia: We magnify thee O all-undefiled One, * Mother of Christ our 
God, * for thou wast overshadowed by the Holy Spirit. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Clothed in the fetid garment of my sins, * I have been cast out from the 
bridal chamber of joy; * but in accordance with Thine ineffable compassion, * 
take pity on me, * as Thou didst take pity on the Prodigal Son, * and be 
merciful to me. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Clothed in the fetid garment of my sins ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Who is not filled with wonder, * at beholding the good struggle of the holy 
martyrs? * How, armed with the Cross and confessing Christ, * while yet in the 
body, * they defeated the bodiless foe; * whereby, they put to flight the demons 
and conquered the barbarian enemies. * Pray ye without ceasing that our souls 
be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV: 
O thou inextinguishable lamp, * and throne of righteousness * most pure 
Sovereign Lady: ** pray thou that our souls be saved.  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. Without the reading 
of a Kathisma. The 7th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 8th at the 
Sixth Hour, the 9th at the Ninth Hour.  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone IV: 
In so far as we are enfeebled and hobbled by sin, * heal our infirmities O 
Physician of our souls, * Thou who knowest the mind of man, ** O Lover of 
mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Hope in God, for I will give thanks unto Him, * He is the 
salvation of my countenance, and my God. 
Verse: As the hart panteth after the fountains of water, so panteth my 
soul after Thee, O God. 
 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (8:13 - 9:7) 
Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be 
your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for 
a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be 
broken, and be snared, and be taken. Bind up the testimony, seal the law among 
my disciples. And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house 
of Jacob, and I will look for him. Behold, I and the children whom the Lord 
hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, 
which dwelleth in mount Zion. And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto 
them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: 
should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? To the law 
and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because 
there is no light in them. And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and 
hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret 
themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward. And they 
shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; 
and they shall be driven to darkness. Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such 
as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun 
and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the 
way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations. The people that walked 
in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of 
death, upon them hath the light shined. Thou hast multiplied the nation, and 
not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and 
as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. For thou hast broken the yoke of his 

--- PAGE 9 ---
burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of 
Midian. For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments 
rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire. For unto us a 
child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his 
shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, 
The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government 
and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his 
kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from 
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: He is the salvation of my countenance, * and my God. 
Verse: Judge me, O God, and give judgment in my cause, against a 
nation that is not holy.. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
MONDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, two by Joseph, in Tone I: 
Let us love the Fast: * for by the power of the Spirit it withereth the most 
wicked passions, * giving us strength to do godly works; * it enableth our mind 
to ascend to heaven, * and gaineth the forgiveness of sins, ** from our 
compassionate God. 
In my wretchedness I have shamefully wasted my life with harlots O Lord, * 
but like the Prodigal, I cry out to Thee with compunction: * I have sinned, O 
heavenly Father; * do Thou cleanse and save me. * reject me not who hast 
departed far from Thee ** and am now destitute of blessed deeds. 
One by Theodore, in Tone III:  
Come, let us with cymbals and songs of praise * greet the season of 
honorable abstinence; * for through the Fast we noetically trample underfoot 
the serpent, * the origin of evil. * Wherefore with boldness let us cry out unto 
Christ: * Grant us, O Savior, without condemnation * to gaze upon Thine all-
holy Cross * and to venerate it, radiantly keeping festival ** with psalms and 
hymns. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion; 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: In God we will boast all the day long: * and in Thy Name 
will we give praise in the age to come. 
Verse: O God, with our ears we have heard, for our fathers have told us. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (6:9 - 22) 
These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his 
generations, and Noah walked with God. And Noah begat three sons, Shem, 
Ham, and Japheth. The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was 
filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was 
corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And God said unto 
Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with 
violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make 
thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it 
within and without with pitch. And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it 

--- PAGE 11 ---
of: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty 
cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. A window shalt thou make to the ark, 
and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in 
the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it. And, 
behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, 
wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the 
earth shall die. But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come 
into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons’ wives with thee. 19 
And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the 
ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female. Of fowls after 
their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth 
after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive. And 
take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and 
it shall be for food for thee, and for them. Thus did Noah; according to all that 
God commanded him, so did he. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: I shall commemorate thy name * in every generation and 
generation 
Verse: My heart is inclined unto a good word. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (8:1 - 21) 
Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? She standeth 
in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths. She crieth at the 
gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors. Unto you, O men, I 
call; and my voice is to the sons of man. O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, 
ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart. Hear; for I will speak of excellent 
things; and the opening of my lips shall be right things. For my mouth shall 
speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination to my lips. All the words of my 
mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them. They 
are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. 
Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold. 
For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not 
to be compared to it. I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of 
witty inventions. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: pride, and arrogance, and 
the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate. Counsel is mine, and sound 
wisdom: I am understanding; I have strength. By me kings reign, and princes 
decree justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth. I 
love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me. Riches and 
honor are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness. My fruit is better than 

--- PAGE 12 ---
gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver. I lead in the way of 
righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: That I may cause those 
that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone II: 
O good Father, * in my madness I am stripped bare of Thy good gifts. * I 
have wandered far from Thee and enslaved myself to a strange citizen. * I lead 
unclean beasts to pasture, * and eating of their food I remain hungry. * But, 
knowing Thy loving-kindness, I flee to Thee: ** in Thy love for mankind, cover 
my nakedness and save me. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: O loving Father, my folly hath stripped me bare ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone II: 
Because the holy martyrs intercede for us * and sing in praise of Christ, * all 
deception hath ceased, ** and the race of mankind hath been saved by faith. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II:  
From thy virginal womb the light of the Word * hath shone forth upon the 
world. * Beseech Him O pure all-holy Virgin, ** that our souls be delivered 
from the snares of the enemy. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Holy God, Holy Mighty ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ...,  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
Reader: O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible 
Kingdom, and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a 
sinner; make steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine 
every defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: 
One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore (Thrice). Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
PSALM 33 (read or sung) 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
