--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT MATINS  
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 6th Kathisma 
from the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone 
of the week. After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VII), the 
Sessional Hymns: 
By Joseph, in Tone VI: 
O disciples of the Savior, * unwavering beacons illumining the world, * 
illumine my soul blinded by sin; * show me to be a participant in the Lord’s day, 
* keeping the salvific commandments, * and delivered from the darkness where 
no light shineth, ** that I may glorify you. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O holy Lady, pure Mother of our God, * who didst ineffably give birth unto 
the Creator of all; * with the sacred apostles ever entreat His goodness, * that 
He deliver us from the passions ** and grant us the remission of sins.  
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VIII), the Sessional Hymns: 
By Theodore, in Tone VI: 
O divine apostles, * beacons shining upon all the world, * we pray ye to 
illumine us who sing your praises, * that we may diligently observe the time of 
the Fast; * and be granted to look upon the Wood of the lifegiving Cross * and 
to adore it with pure eyes and lips, * crying aloud with joy: ** O Lord, glory be 
to Thee. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Virgin Theotokos, thou blessed hope of the world: * I beseech of thee 
thine only wondrous protection; * have compassion on thy defenseless people: 
* entreat the merciful God * that our souls may be delivered from every danger, 
** for thou alone art blessed. 
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; for those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE IV 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Christ is my power, * my God and my Lord, * the holy Church 
divinely singeth, * crying with a pure mind, * keeping festival in the 
Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O ye faithful, let us give ourselves over to fasting, tears and prayer, to works 
of compassion, to upright thoughts and to a life of purity, that we may be 
partakers of glory. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O apostles, like radiant stars ye illumine the firmament of the precious 
Church: illumine our hearts with the divine Spirit. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Like unto divine coals kindled by the immaterial fire, O wise apostles of our 
God, burn up the material passions of our hearts. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O all-immaculate One, the inextinguishable lamp, the radiant bridal 
chamber, higher than the seraphim, the chariot of the cherubim, set me free 
from grievous sins and dangers. 
Another canon, by Theodore, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: The prophet heard of Thy coming ..., 
Refrain: Holy Apostles of Christ pray for us. 
The apostles of the Savior have appeared like shining torches of God’s 
revelation, dispersing the night of ignorance, enlightening the Church and 
giving light to all the inhabited earth, by the fiery tongues of their divine 
teaching. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Refrain: Holy Apostles of Christ pray for us. 
Having journeyed throughout the world, each to a different country, the 
apostles gathered all mankind into the one faith; and sharing now in the rewards 
of heaven, ye rejoice ceaselessly praying to Christ, that we all be saved. 
Glory ..., I glorify the Son and the Spirit who proceed forth from the Father 
like rays of light from the sun: the One begotten as Offspring, the Other 
proceeding and sent forth; divine and coeternal Trinity, worshiped by all 
creation. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Having given birth to a child yet preserving thy 
purity, O pure Virgin, thou hast given birth to both God and man, a single 
Person with a twofold Nature. This thy miracle, O Virgin Mother, filleth every 
ear and mind with wonder. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
By your holy intercessions, apostles of the Lord, may we be deemed worthy 
to venerate the lifegiving Cross with pure lips and eyes, for it is hath been set 
forth in the world for all to venerate. 
Katavasia: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was 
afraid. * How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto 
mankind? * and he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; 
* glory to Thy power, O Lord. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Through fasting Moses was revealed as the seer of God, and Elijah was 
taken up in a chariot of fire; make haste O my soul, and abstain from harmful 
thoughts, that thou mayest be delivered from delusion. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I fall into ever greater sins and inflict fresh wounds upon myself. By the 
prayers of Thine apostles, O Christ, heal the stony hardness of my heart. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O divinely effulgent stars illumining the world, scatter the clouds of our 
passions that we may worship at the radiant feast of the Resurrection, praising 
the Sun of glory. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: All generations call thee blessed, O godly-blessed One, as thou 
thyself prophesied. For thou alone hast given birth to the blessed Word, who 
ineffably took flesh from thee for the sake of mankind. 
Second canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Thy venerable Children in the furnace ..., 
Refrain: Holy Apostles of Christ pray for us. 
We swim in the deep waters of delusion O apostles, catch us with the rod of 
faith, and we shall bless, praise and supremely exalt the Lord throughout the 
ages. 
Refrain: Holy Apostles of Christ pray for us. 
Great is the might which Thou hast shown in Thine apostles. For their 
shadows and their clothing brought healing to the sick; and they bless, praise 
and supremely exalt the throughout all ages. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Without beginning is the birth of the Son, and the procession of the Spirit. I 
worship the Father who begetteth, I glorify the Son who is begotten, and I sing 
the praises of the Holy Spirit who shineth forth with the Father and the Son. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Unto Him to whom thou hast ineffably given 
birth O Virgin, cease not to entreat; that as the Lover of mankind, He may save 
from danger all those who flee to thee for refuge. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O holy company of the twelve apostles, grant that uncondemned I may 
venerate the precious Cross, that I may bless, praise and supremely exalt the 
Lord throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: Thy venerable Children in the furnace * likened to the 
cherubim * chanted the thrice-holy hymn * Bless ye, praise ye and 
supremely exalt ye the Lord throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders 
of Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the 
Word Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we 
magnify and thee we call blessed. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O abundantly merciful God and Lord, cleanse the wounds of my heart and 
heal them with the remedy of repentance. I have sinned, I have sinned against 
Thee: be compassionate with me and save me by the prayers of Thine apostles, 
for Thou art plenteous in mercy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Like the Prodigal, I have foolishly followed my unruly desires and have 
wandered far from my former self: I feed upon the roughage of pleasure and 
am deprived of the food of salvation. O Christ, have compassion upon me and 
save me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast not cleansed thyself from evil nor turned away from 
the lusts that corrupt thee. Why dost thou rejoice because thou hast observed 
the Fast? For such is not the fast chosen by the Lord, who desireth true 
amendment. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Illumine me with divine light, O Virgin Theotokos, who hast 
given birth to the Light, and drive away darkness from my soul, that I may bless 
thee; for all generations of mankind, as thou hast prophesied, call thee blessed. 
Second canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving of a seedless conception ..., 
Refrain: Holy Apostles of Christ pray for us. 
Simple in speech yet most wise in knowledge, ye have destroyed the webs 
spun by philosophers, the cunning of the orators, and the divinations of 
astrologers: Wherefore, O apostles of Christ, ye have been revealed as the only 
true teachers of the whole inhabited earth. 
Refrain: Holy Apostles of Christ pray for us. 
Peter orates, and Plato falls silent; Paul teaches, and Pythagoras is heard no 
more. The company of the apostles, preaching the mysteries of God, have 
buried the dead voice of the pagan Greeks and called the whole world to the 
worship of Christ. 
Glory ..., O Father, single only-Begetter of the only-Begotten Son; O only 
Light and Brightness from the one and only Light; and Thou, one and only 
Holy Spirit from the one God, true Lord from the Lord: O holy Three in One, 
save me as I theologize Thy divinity. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The marvel of thy childbearing doth fill me with 
wonder, O all-immaculate one. How canst thou conceive without seed Him 
whom none can comprehend? How hast thou remained a Virgin and yet given 
birth as a Mother? “Accept the miracle with faith, and worship the Child that is 
born, for all that He willeth, He accomplisheth.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
By your prayers, O holy apostles of Christ, may we all be deemed worthy to 
see and venerate with pure lips and souls the precious Cross, the all-holy Tree 
that hath blossomed forth salvation upon the world. 
Katavasia: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VI: 
Like the Prodigal I have fallen from the Father’s sonship, * and as a slave I 
have eaten with swine, * yet their food did not satisfy me; * wherefore I have 
returned to Thee Whom I wickedly forsook, * O compassionately loving 
Father, * for rightly turning back in repentance, I cry aloud to Thee: * “O 
Father, I have sinned against heaven and before Thee; * grant me who hath 
returned to Thee, ** Thy great mercy. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Like the Prodigal I have fallen ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Great wonders hath our God done for His elect. * Rejoice and be glad, all ye 
His servants: * For He hath prepared for you crowns of glory and His 
Kingdom. ** We entreat you to not forget us. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VI: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the 
Fruit of life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Sovereign Lady, with the holy 
apostles, ** that He have mercy upon our souls.  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. With the reading of 
the 9th Kathisma. The 10th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 11th at 
the Sixth Hour. The 12th Kathisma is read at the Ninth Hour. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone VII: 
O Lover of mankind, * if Thou shouldest mark iniquities, * what hope is 
there for our salvation? * But, O Lord, in Thy mercy ** send down from on 
high Thy help upon Thy people. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: O God, in Thy name save me, * and in Thy strength do 
Thou judge me. 
Verse: O God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my 
mouth. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (11: 10 - 12:2) 
Thus saith the Lord: In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall 
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall 
be glorious. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his 
hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be 
left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and 
from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the 
sea. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the 
outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four 
corners of the earth. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries 
of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex 
Ephraim. But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the 
west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon 
Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them. And the Lord 
shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind 
shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, 
and make men go over dryshod. And there shall be an highway for the remnant 
of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day 
that he came up out of the land of Egypt. And in that day thou shalt say, O 
Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned 
away, and thou didst comfort me. Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and 
not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is 
become my salvation. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Give ear O God unto my prayer, * and disdain not my 
supplication. 
Verse: Attend unto me and hear me. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
THURSDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, two by Joseph, in Tone V: 
O Savior, who art the true sweetness, * of old Thou didst make sweet the 
bitter waters of Marah, * by the tree that prefigured the divine Cross. * Upon 
which Thou wast pleased to be Crucified, * tasting the bitterness of gall. * Thy 
side was pierced, * from whence flowed the waters of forgiveness, * 
refashioning our mortal nature. * Wherefore we glorify Thine ineffable might * 
and we pray that in this season of the Fast * our hearts may be filled with 
reverence for Thee, O Lord; ** and that we may find forgiveness of sins and 
great mercy.  
O Word, who wast stretched out upon the Cross, * gathering together those 
that had wandered far from Thee, * raise up my thoughts from the fetid 
passions, * and enrich me with a multitude of virtues; * grant unto my heart 
reverent fear of Thee, * and to my soul perfect love, * severing me from carnal 
love. * That through abstinence, prayer and supplication, * I may find favor 
with Thee in this present season, * and with joy behold the day of Thine 
Arising, ** and gain Thy great mercy. 
One by Theodore, in Tone I:  
Having passed through the third week of the Fast, * count us worthy O 
Christ the Word, * to look upon the Wood of Thy lifegiving Cross * and to 
reverently venerate it. * Grant us to sing worthily and glorify Thy power, * 
praising Thy Passion, * and to approach Thy glorious, pure and holy 
Resurrection, * the mystical Passover ** whereby Adam hath been restored 
again to Paradise. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion. 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Have mercy on me, O God; * for man hath trodden me 
down. 
Verse: Mine enemies have trodden me down all the day long. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (7:11 - 8:3) 
In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, the 
seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great 
deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened. And the rain was 

--- PAGE 11 ---
upon the earth forty days and forty nights. In the selfsame day entered Noah, 
and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife, and the 
three wives of his sons with them, into the ark; They, and every beast after his 
kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth 
upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every 
sort. And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein 
is the breath of life. And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, 
as God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in. And the flood was 
forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it 
was lift up above the earth. And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly 
upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters. And the waters 
prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the 
whole heaven, were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and 
the mountains were covered. And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, 
both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth, and every man: All in whose nostrils was the breath of 
life, of all that was in the dry land, died. And every living substance was 
destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the 
creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the 
earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark. 
And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days. And God 
remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in 
the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters assuaged; 
The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and 
the rain from heaven was restrained; And the waters returned from off the earth 
continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were 
abated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me: * for my 
soul trusted in Thee. 
Verse: In the shadow of Thy wings shall I hope, until iniquity shall pass 
away. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (10:1 - 22) 
The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish 
son is the heaviness of his mother. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but 
righteousness delivereth from death. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the 
righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the wicked. He 

--- PAGE 12 ---
becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of the diligent 
maketh rich. He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth in 
harvest is a son that causeth shame. Blessings are upon the head of the just: but 
violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. The memory of the just is blessed: 
but the name of the wicked shall rot. The wise in heart will receive 
commandments: but a prating fool shall fall. He that walketh uprightly walketh 
surely: but he that perverteth his ways shall be known. He that winketh with the 
eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool shall fall. The mouth of a righteous man 
is a well of life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. Hatred stirreth 
up strifes: but love covereth all sins. In the lips of him that hath understanding 
wisdom is found: but a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding. 
Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction. 
The rich man’s wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the poor is their 
poverty. The labor of the righteous tendeth to life: the fruit of the wicked to sin. 
He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof 
erreth. He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander, is a 
fool. In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his 
lips is wise. The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of the wicked is 
little worth. The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want of 
wisdom. The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow 
with it. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VI: 
Thou, the life of all, * wast hung upon the wood of the Cross, O Christ 
God; * Restore life to my soul, which hath been slain by my many sins; * and 
suffer not Thy ewe to utterly perish, O Good Shepherd. * I have turned away 
from Thy commandments, * and living prodigally I have wasted the wealth of 
sinlessness which Thou hast given me. * becoming a lover of sin * but bring me 
to repentance and renew me, ** for Thou alone art abundantly merciful. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: Thou, the life of all ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, * denied Thee not, * nor forsook Thy 
commandments: ** by their intercessions have mercy on us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee crucified, O Christ, * she who gaveth 
birth to Thee cried aloud: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, * O my Son 
How is it that Thou diest?, * suspended upon the Tree, ** O Bestower of life?”  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 

--- PAGE 14 ---
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, 
and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make 
steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every 
defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One 
is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore. (Thrice) 
Psalm 33 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
