--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT MATINS  
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 13th Kathisma, 
and then the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the 
week. After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (14th Kathisma), the following 
Sessional Hymns. 
 In Tone V: 
Mankind, who of old * died through eating from the tree, * hath been 
restored to life by Thy Cross, O merciful One. * By its power, O good One, 
strengthen us, * that with compunction we may pass through the season of 
abstinence, * obediently executing Thy will, * and behold the day of Thy light-
bearing Resurrection. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., in Tone V:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee willingly suspended on the Cross 
between two thieves, O Christ, Thy Mother, her womb rent asunder maternally, 
said: “O my sinless Son, how is it that Thou art unjustly nailed to the Cross like 
a malefactor, desiring to give life to the human race, in that Thou art 
compassionate?”  
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (15th Kathisma), the following 
Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone I: 
Having cleansed our flesh by abstinence * and with prayer filled our souls 
with light, * grant us, O Lord, to look upon Thy precious Cross * and to adore 
it with fear, * chanting hymns and saying: * Glory to Thy lifegiving Cross; * 
glory to the divine spear, * by which we are restored to life, ** O Thou who 
alone lovest mankind. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., in Tone I:  
Stavrotheotokion: When the Ewe-lamb saw Thee her Lamb, * crucified 
upon the Tree between two thieves, O longsuffering Word, * Thy side pierced 
by a lance, * with a mother’s grief she lamented: * “What is this strange and 
fearful mystery, O my Jesus? * How can the uncircumscribable God, * be 
confined within a tomb? * such things are inexpressible? ** Forsake me not 
who hath given birth to Thee, O my sweetest Jesus.” 
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; for those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE V  
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone V: 
Irmos: O Thou Who hast clothed Thyself in light as with a garment, * I 
rise early unto Thee and cry out to Thee: * Enlighten my darkened soul, 
O Christ, * in that Thou alone art compassionate!  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed by Thy wounds, cleanse the wounds 
of my soul O Christ, who didst accept suffering in the flesh.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Upon beholding Thee O Christ, hanging upon the Wood in the flesh, the 
sun’s light became darkened; the earth quaked and the rocks were rent asunder. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
O Thou Who wast crowned with thorns, cleanse my soul which is full of the 
thorns of the passions, O Lord; for the sake of Thine extreme goodness. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Stavrotheotokion: O all-pure one, thou hast brought forth my Creator as a 
new-born babe, entreat Him O Lady, to fashion me anew, for I am enslaved to 
a multitude of evils. 
Another Canon by Theodore, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Seeking Thee early in the morn ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
At the place of the Skull the Jews who crucified Thee O Christ, wagged their 
heads in laughter and mockery; but Thou didst endure this for our salvation.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Pilate wrote the inscription on Thy Cross in three languages, revealing Thee 
O Christ as one of the Trinity, who willingly suffered for the salvation of all. 
Glory ..., O ye faithful, let us praise the supremely radiant threefold Sun of 
the Trinity, honoring the Father as Light, glorifying the Son as Light, and 
proclaiming the Spirit as Light. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O pure one, He who was born from thee hath 
made thee higher than the angels. For they gaze on Him in fear as God, but 
thou hast carried Him in thine arms as Thy Son. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O precious Cross, salvific guardian of the world, watch over me as I fast and 
show me to be worthy to take part in thy holy veneration. 
Katavasia: Seeking Thee early in the morn, * we sing Thy praises, O 
Christ God, * who for our sake became poor * and in Thy flesh * endured 
the Cross and death. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Unto Thee the Fashioner of all, * the children in the furnace 
chanted a hymn: * All ye works of the Lord, * supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou didst stretch out Thine arms upon the Cross, O Christ, destroying the 
sin of our forefather, who stretched out his hands in greed. By the Tree Thou 
hast healed the curse of the tree: wherefore we sing Thy praises throughout all 
ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
I fall down before Thee, O Word, who desirest my salvation. Quickly take 
away the desire for evil from my heart, O Thou who didst willingly endure the 
Cross and Passion. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Having desired the defiled life of the Prodigal, my prodigal soul hath been 
darkened. Illumine me with the thought of returning to Thee O Word, who at 
Thy Passion darkened the light of the sun. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Cause every ill to vanish from my greatly suffering heart, O 
Mother of Christ God. Shatter the arrows and bows of the demons who war 
against my humbled soul. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Second canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Unto Christ who saved the children ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
What shall we wretched ones offer Thee, O Master of all, who hast suffered 
for us? Thou didst endure the Cross for our sake, O Christ, and we sing the 
praises of Thy boundless mercy and grace. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
The lawless Jews hung Thee upon the Tree, killing Thee out of envy, but 
weakened not the power of Thy glory. For as the Master of all, Thou didst 
willingly suffer. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord 
I honor the three Hypostases of the transcendent Godhead; the 
beginningless Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, undivided in essence and 
nature, Whom I glorify throughout the ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: We praise her who is higher than the heavens 
and exalted above the cherubim, the first among the saints, the undefiled 
Maiden who bore the God of all, and we supremely exalt her throughout all 
ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O most blessed Cross of Christ, Thou victory written in the heavens yet 
appearing from the earth; grant that, cleansed by fasting, we may worthily 
venerate thee. 
Verse: We praise, bless and Worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: Unto Christ who saved the children * that sang His praises * 
and who bedewed the raging furnace, * let us hymn and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone V: 
Irmos: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath conceived in her 
womb, * and hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God and man; 
* and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and the Virgin we call 
blessed. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Wash away the stony hardness of my soul, O compassionately loving Savior, 
and grant me the fount of divine compunction: for Thou hast poured forth life 
upon me from Thy side, cleansing the wellsprings of my transgressions. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Forsaking the heights of virtue I have thrown myself into the depths of sin. 
But draw me up and save me, O Lord, who having ascended the Cross didst 
draw mankind to Thyself. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou, O Lord, who art sweetness and delight, being the Creator O Christ, 
tasted gall, yet those of Adam’s offspring who fell from the delights of paradise 
Thou hast raised up and saved by Thy Passion, wherefore we sing Thy praises. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: All-holy Lady, my hope and refuge, heal the wounds of my soul 
and grant my mind peace, that I may praise Thy greatness, O Ever-Virgin 
Theotokos. 
Second canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Moses saw thee as the bush ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
The transgressors who mockingly clothed Thee with purple, O Christ, and 
crowned Thee as King, struck Thy head with a reed, and out of envy crucified 
Thee, giving Thee gall to drink: But we the faithful in our hymns magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Beholding Thy sufferings upon the Cross, the sun hid its rays; and seeing 
the indignities which Thou didst endure, O Master, the whole of creation 
quaked and rocks rent themselves asunder. But we in our hymns, O Christ 
Savior, magnify Thee. 
Glory ..., O Unity of the threefold Sun, Light and Life, and Creator of all, 
God and Lord, shining with a single light, three Hypostases in one Godhead: 
we the faithful magnify Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: In prophecy David the Psalmist called thee Zion: 
for He whom the heavens cannot contain made His abode within thee 
fashioning from thy womb the propitiation of the world. In our hymns, O pure 
Mother, we magnify thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Thy salvific Cross doth illumine the faithful O Lord, through abstinence 
count us worthy to hasten to behold it and venerate it for our sanctification; 
that through it we may magnify Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Katavasia: Moses saw thee as the bush * unconsumed by fire, * and 
Jacob beheld thee as the living ladder * and the gate of heaven, * through 
which Christ our God hath passed. * In our hymns, O pure Mother, thee 
do we magnify. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VI: 
I have scattered the riches which the Father hath given me, * and wasted my 
life in prodigal living, * my sin hath beguiled me, * for taking pleasure in the 
sweetness of passion, * I have become like the irrational beasts, * transgressing 
Thy saving commandments. * O Christ God, whose good pleasure it was to 
hang upon the Cross for my sake, * deprive me not of the sonship of the 
Father, * but accept me who have returned to Thee * like the Prodigal Son, ** 
and save me. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: I have scattered the riches which the Father hath given me ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
At the commemoration of Thy martyrs, O Lord, * the whole of creation 
keepeth festival; * heaven rejoiceth with the angels, and the earth maketh glad 
with all mankind. ** By their intercessions have mercy on us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee hanging upon the Cross * the all-pure 
one weeping, cried aloud with a mother’s grief: * “O my Son and my God, O 
my sweetest Child, ** how dost Thou endure this shameful suffering?” 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. Without the reading 
of a Kathisma. The 19th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 20th at 
the Sixth Hour.  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone VIII: 
In Thy power, O God, * Thou hast perfected all things by the Word, * 
bringing us into being from nothing. * Deliver us not up to suffer for our 
trespasses, ** we entreat Thee, O sinless Lord. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: If ye indeed speak of righteousness * judge rightly, ye sons 
of men? 
Verse: The righteous man shall be glad when he seeth God’s vengeance. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (13: 2-13) 
Thus saith the Lord: Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the 
voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. 
I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for 
mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness. The noise of a multitude in 
the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of 
nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle. 
They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the 
weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. Howl ye; for the day of 
the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Therefore 
shall all hands be faint, and every man’s heart shall melt: And they shall be 
afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a 
woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be 
as flames. Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce 
anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. 
For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: 
the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her 
light to shine. And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their 
iniquity; and I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low 
the haughtiness of the terrible. I will make a man more precious than fine gold; 
even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. Therefore I will shake the 
heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord 
of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: O God, my helper art Thou, * and Thy mercy shall go 
before me. 
Verse: Rescue me from mine enemies, O God: and from them that rise 
up against me redeem me. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
FRIDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 
Two Stichera from the Triodion, by Joseph, in Tone VII: 
Like the Prodigal, I have departed far from Thy grace * and Wasted the 
riches of Thy loving-kindness: * but now I flee to Thee, O compassionately 
loving Lord * crying aloud to Thee O God: ** I have sinned, have mercy on 
me. (Twice) 
After which we chant 4 Stichera to the Martyrs from the Oktoechos, in 
the Tone of the week, and 4 Stichera to the saint of the day from the 
Menaion (Repeating the first) 
Glory ..., Oktoechos verse for the Reposed, in the Tone of the week. 
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
Then, “O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Give us help from affliction: * for vain is the salvation of 
man. 
Verse: O God, Thou hast rejected us and destroyed us: Thou wast angry, 
but hast taken pity on us. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (8:4 - 21) 
The ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, 
upon the mountains of Ararat. And the waters decreased continually until the 
tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops 
of the mountains seen. And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah 
opened the window of the ark which he had made: And he sent forth a raven, 
which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth. 
And he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off 
the face of the ground; But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and 
she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole 
earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into 
the ark. And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove 
out of the ark; And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her 
mouth was an olive leaf plucked off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated 
from off the earth. And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; 

--- PAGE 10 ---
which returned not again unto him any more. And it came to pass in the six 
hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the 
waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the 
ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry. And in the second 
month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried. And 
God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy 
sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee. Bring forth with thee every living thing that 
is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing 
that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and 
be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth. And Noah went forth, and his sons, 
and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him: Every beast, every creeping thing, 
and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went 
forth out of the ark. And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and took of 
every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the 
altar. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor; and the Lord said in his heart, I will 
not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake; for the imagination of 
man’s heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every 
thing living, as I have done. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Hearken O God unto my supplication, * attend unto my 
prayer. 
Verse: So will I chant unto Thy Name unto the ages. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (10:31 - 11:12) 
The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward tongue shall 
be cut out. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of 
the wicked speaketh frowardness. A false balance is abomination to the Lord: 
but a just weight is his delight. When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but 
with the lowly is wisdom. The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the 
perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them. Riches profit not in the day of 
wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death. The righteousness of the 
perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness. The 
righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors shall be taken 
in their own naughtiness. When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall 
perish: and the hope of unjust men perisheth. The righteous is delivered out of 
trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. An hypocrite with his mouth 
destroyeth his neighbor: but through knowledge shall the just be delivered. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when the wicked 
perish, there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it 
is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. He that is void of wisdom despiseth 
his neighbor: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace. 
And the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts. 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
FRIDAY IN THE THIRD WEEK 
AT COMPLINE 
The Akathist Hymn is chanted at Small Compline, exactly as on the 
previous Friday, except that we chant the third stasis of the Hymn, 
beginning at the seventh Ikos, and ending with the tenth Kontakion: 
After Our Father ..., we say the Kontakion to the Martyrs: There is no 
reading
For Convenience the service is presented below: 
 from the Gospel at the end, as there was on the Friday of the 
first week. 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: Amen. Glory to Thee our God ..., Heavenly King ..., Holy God ..., 
Our Father.  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Reader: Lord Have Mercy (12 times)..., Glory ..., Both now ..., O come let us 
worship ..., Then:  
PSALM 50 
Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me 
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine 
iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and 
done this evil before Thee, that Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and 
prevail when Thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in 
sins did my mother bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and 
secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt 
sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; 
the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my sins, 
and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy 
Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy 
governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the 
ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, 
Thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O 
Lord, Thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if 
Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou 
shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is 

--- PAGE 13 ---
broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy good 
pleasure unto Zion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt Thou 
be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt 
offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.  
PSALM 69 
O God, be attentive unto helping me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Let 
them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned 
back and brought to shame that desire evils against me. Let them be turned 
back straightway in shame that say unto me: Well done! Well done! Let them be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all that seek after Thee, O God, and let them that love 
Thy salvation say continually: The Lord be magnified. But as for me, I am poor 
and needy; O God come unto mine aid. My helper and my deliverer art Thou, 
O Lord; make no long tarrying.  
PSALM 142 
O Lord, hear my prayer; give ear unto my supplication in Thy truth; hearken 
unto me in Thy righteousness. And enter not into judgment with Thy servant, 
for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified. For the enemy hath persecuted 
my soul; he hath humbled my life down to the earth. He hath sat me in 
darkness as those that have been long dead, and my spirit within me is become 
despondent; within me my heart is troubled. I remembered days of old, I 
meditated on all Thy works, I pondered on the creations of Thy hands. I 
stretched forth my hands unto Thee; my soul thirsteth after Thee like a 
waterless land. Quickly hear me, O Lord; my spirit hath fainted away. Turn not 
Thy face away from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 
Cause me to hear Thy mercy in the morning; for in Thee have I put my hope. 
Cause me to know, O Lord, the way wherein I should walk; for unto Thee have 
I lifted up my soul. Rescue me from mine enemies, O Lord; unto Thee have I 
fled for refuge. Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. Thy good Spirit 
shall lead me in the land of uprightness; for Thy name’s sake, O Lord, shalt 
Thou quicken me. In Thy righteousness shalt Thou bring my soul out of 
affliction, and in Thy mercy shalt Thou utterly destroy mine enemies. And Thou 
shalt cut off all them that afflict my soul, for I am Thy servant.  
THE DOXOLOGY 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace and good will among men. 
We praise Thee, we bless Thee, we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we give 
thanks to Thee for Thy great glory. O Lord, heavenly King, God the Father 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Almighty; O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ; and O Holy Spirit. O 
Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that takest away the sin of the 
world; have mercy on us; Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive 
our prayer; Thou that sittest at the right hand of the Father, have mercy on us. 
For Thou only art holy; Thou only art the Lord, O Jesus Christ, to the glory of 
God the Father. Amen. Every night will I bless Thee, and I will praise Thy 
Name forever, yea, forever and forever. Lord, thou hast been our refuge in 
generation and generation. I said: O Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul, for 
I have sinned against Thee. O Lord, unto Thee have I fled for refuge, teach me 
to do Thy will, for Thou art my God. For in Thee is the fountain of life, in Thy 
light shall we see light. O continue Thy mercy unto them that know Thee. 
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this night without sin. Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord, the God of our Fathers, and praised and glorified is Thy name unto the 
ages. Amen. Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we have hoped 
in Thee. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me Thy statutes.. Blessed art Thou, O 
Master, give me understanding of Thy statutes. Blessed art Thou, O Holy One, 
enlighten me by Thy statutes. O Lord, Thy mercy endureth forever; disdain not 
the works of Thy hands. To Thee is due praise, to Thee is due a song, to Thee 
glory is due, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, Now and 
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
THE SYMBOL OF FAITH 
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and 
of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
the Only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true 
God of true God; begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by 
Whom all things were made; Who for us men and for our salvation came down 
from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, 
and became man; And was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered 
and was buried; And arose again on the third day according to the Scriptures; 
And ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; And 
shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living and the dead; Whose 
kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life; 
Who proceedeth from the Father; Who with the Father and the Son together is 
worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. In One, Holy, Catholic, 
and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins. I look 
for the resurrection of the dead, And the life of the age to come. Amen.  
Then immediately:  

--- PAGE 15 ---
It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, ever blessed and most 
blameless, and Mother of our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and 
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, who without corruption 
gavest birth to God the Word, the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
After which we chant the third stasis, beginning with the Canon:  
Canon to the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
ODE I 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Beholding thee, the living book of Christ, sealed by the Spirit, the great 
archangel exclaimed to thee, O pure one: Rejoice, vessel of joy, through which 
the curse of the first mother is annulled.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, Virgin bride of God, restoration of Adam and the death of Hades. 
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, palace of the King of all. Rejoice, fiery throne of 
the Almighty.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, O thou who alone hast blossomed forth the unfading Rose. 
Rejoice, for thou hast borne the fragrant Apple. Rejoice, Maiden unwedded, the 
pure fragrance of the only King, and preservation of the world.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, treasure-house of purity, by which we have risen from our fall. 
Rejoice, sweet-smelling lily which perfumeth the faithful, fragrant incense and 
most precious myrrh.  
ODE III 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee, the untilled field, hath grown the divine Ear of grain. Rejoice, 
living table that hath held the Bread of Life. Rejoice, O Lady, never-failing 
spring of the Living Water.  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
O Heifer that bearest the unblemished Calf for the faithful, rejoice!, Ewe 
that hast brought forth the lamb of God, Who taketh away the sins of all the 
world. Rejoice, ardent mercy-seat.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice brightest dawn, who alone bearest Christ the Sun. Rejoice, dwelling-
place of Light, who hast dispersed darkness and utterly driven away the gloomy 
demons.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, only portal through which the Word alone hath passed. By thy 
birthgiving, O Lady, thou hast broken the bars and gates of Hades. Rejoice, 
Bride of God, divine entry of the saved.  
ODE IV 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus 
the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he 
hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
With voices of song in faith we cry aloud to thee, who art worthy of all 
praise: Rejoice, butter mountain, mountain curdled by the Spirit. Rejoice, 
candlestick and vessel of manna, which sweeteneth the senses of all the pious.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, mercy-seat of the world, most pure Lady. Rejoice, ladder raising all 
from the earth by grace. Rejoice, bridge that in very truth hast led from death to 
life all those who hymn thee.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, higher than the heavens, who didst painlessly carry 
within thy womb the Fountain of the earth. Rejoice, sea-shell that with thy 
blood didst dye a divine purple robe for the King of Hosts.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, Lady who in truth didst give birth to the lawgiver, Who freely 
washed clean the iniquities of all. O Maiden who hast not known wedlock, 
unfathomable depth, unutterable height, by whom we have been deified.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Praising thee who hast woven for the world a Crown not made by the hand 
of man, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, the guardian of all mankind, fortress 
and rampart, and sacred refuge.  
ODE V 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God 
of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all 
who hymn thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, who hast given birth to the Way of life, and 
who didst save the world from the flood of sin. Rejoice, Bride of God, tidings 
fearful to tell and hear. Rejoice, dwelling-place of the Master of all creation.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, the strength and fortress of all, sanctuary of glory, 
the death of Hades, most radiant bridal chamber. Rejoice, joy of angels. Rejoice, 
helper of those who pray to thee with faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Lady, fiery chariot of the Word, living paradise, having in thy 
midst the Tree of Life, the Lord of Life, Whose sweetness vivifieth all who 
partake of Him with faith, though they have been subject to corruption.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Strengthened by thy might, we raise our cry to thee with faith: Rejoice, city 
of the King of all, of which things glorious and worthy to be heard were clearly 
spoken. Rejoice, unhewn mountain, unfathomed depth.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, all-pure one, spacious tabernacle of the Word, shell which 
produced the divine Pearl. Rejoice, all-wondrous Theotokos, who dost reconcile 
with God all who ever call thee blessed.  
ODE VI 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * 
O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
O undefiled bridal chamber of the Word, cause of deification for all, rejoice, 
all-honorable preaching of the prophet; rejoice, adornment of the apostles.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee hath come the Dew that extinguished the flame of idolatry; 
therefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, living fleece wet with dew, which Gideon saw 
of old, O Virgin.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Behold, to thee, O Virgin, we cry: Rejoice! Be thou the port and a haven for 
all that sail upon the troubled waters of affliction, amidst all the snares of the 
enemy.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Thou cause of joy, endue our thoughts with grace, that we may cry to thee: 
Rejoice, unconsumed bush, cloud of light that unceasingly overshadoweth the 
faithful.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We sing of thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, chariot of the noetic Sun; true vine, 
that hast produced ripe grapes, from which floweth a wine making glad the 
souls of those who glorify thee in faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Bride of God, who hast given birth to the Healer of all; thou 
mystical staff, that didst blossom with the unfading Flower. Rejoice, O Lady, 
through whom we are filled with joy and inherited life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
No tongue, however eloquent, hath power to sing thy praises, O Lady; for 
thou art exalted above the seraphim, having given birth to Christ the King, 
Whom do thou beseech to deliver from all harm those that venerate thee in 
faith.  
 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
The ends of the earth praise thee and call thee blessed, and they cry to thee 
with love: Rejoice, pure scroll, upon which the Word was written by the finger 
of the Father. Do thou beseech Him to inscribe thy servants in the book of life, 
O Theotokos.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
We thy servants pray to thee and bend the knees of our hearts: Incline thine 
ear, O pure one; save thy servants who are always sinking, and preserve thy city 
from every enemy captivity, O Theotokos.  
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Within thy womb thou hast received the Word; thou hast carried Him who 
carrieth all; O pure one, thou hast fed with milk Him Who by His beck feedeth 
the whole world. To Him we sing: Sing to the Lord, all ye His works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Moses perceived in the burning bush the great mystery of thy childbearing, 
while the youths clearly prefigured it as they stood in the midst of the fire and 
were not consumed, O Virgin pure and inviolate. Therefore do we hymn thee 
and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We who once through falsehood were stripped naked, have been clothed in 
the robe of incorruption by thy childbearing; and we who once sat in the 
darkness of sin have seen the light, O Maiden, dwelling-place of Light. 
Therefore we hymn thee, and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Through thee the dead are brought to life, for thou hast borne the 
Hypostatic Life. They who once were mute are now made to speak well; lepers 
are cleansed, diseases are driven out, the hosts of the spirits of the air are 
conquered, O Virgin, the salvation of mankind.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Thou didst bear the salvation of the world, O pure one, and through thee 
we were raised from earth to heaven. Rejoice, all-blessed, protection and 
strength, rampart and fortress of those who sing: O all ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
ODE IX 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the 
holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us, the faithful, call to thee: Rejoice! Through thee, O Maiden, we have 
become partakers of everlasting joy. Save us from temptations, from barbarian 
captivity, and from every other injury that befalleth the sinful because of the 
multitude of their transgressions.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Thou hast appeared as our enlightenment and confirmation; wherefore, we 
cry to thee: Rejoice, never-setting star that hast brought the great Sun into the 
world. Rejoice, pure Virgin who hast opened the closed Eden. Rejoice, pillar of 
fire, leading mankind to a higher life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us stand with reverence in the house of our God, and let us cry aloud: 
Rejoice, Sovereign Lady of the world. Rejoice, Mary, Sovereign Lady of us all. 
Rejoice, thou who alone art immaculate and fair among women. Rejoice, vessel 
that receivedst the inexhaustible myrrh poured out upon thee.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Thou dove that hast borne the Merciful One, rejoice, ever-virgin! Rejoice, 
glory of all the saints. Rejoice, crown of martyrs. Rejoice, divine adornment of 
all the righteous and salvation of us the faithful.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Spare Thine inheritance, O God, and overlook all our sins now, for as an 
intercessor in Thy sight, O Christ, Thou hast her who on earth gave birth to 
Thee without seed, when in Thy great mercy Thou didst will to take the form of 
a man.  
Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion: in Tone VIII: 

--- PAGE 21 ---
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: * Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
The Third Stasis  
IKOS VII  
A new creation hath the Creator revealed, manifesting Himself unto us His 
creatures. For He sprang from a seedless womb, and kept it incorrupt as it was, 
that seeing the miracle we might sing to Her, crying out:  
Rejoice; Flower of incorruptibility:  
Rejoice; Crown of continence!  
Rejoice; Thou from whom shineth the Archetype of the Resurrection:  
Rejoice; Thou Who revealest the life of the angels!  
Rejoice; Tree of shining fruit, whereby the faithful are nourished:  
Rejoice; Tree of goodly shade by which many are sheltered!  
Rejoice; Thou that has carried in Thy womb the Redeemer of captives:  
Rejoice; Thou that gavest birth to the Guide of those astray!  
Rejoice; Supplication before the Righteous Judge:  
Rejoice; Forgiveness of many sins!  
Rejoice; Robe of boldness for the naked:  
Rejoice; Love that doth vanquish all desire!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION VIII  
Having beheld a strange nativity, let us estrange ourselves from the world 
and transport our minds to Heaven; for the Most High God appeared on earth 
as a lowly man, because He wished to draw to the heights them that cry to Him: 
Alleluia! 
IKOS VIII  
Wholly present was the Inexpressible Word among those here below, yet in 
no way absent from those on high; for this was a divine condescension and not 
a change of place, and His birth was from a God-receiving Virgin Who heard 
these things:  
Rejoice; Container of the Uncontainable God:  
Rejoice; Door of solemn mystery!  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Rejoice; Report doubtful to unbelievers:  
Rejoice; Undoubted boast of the faithful!  
Rejoice; Most holy chariot of Him Who sitteth upon the Cherubim:  
Rejoice; All-glorious temple of Him Who is above the Seraphim!  
Rejoice; Thou Who hast united opposites:  
Rejoice; Thou Who hast joined virginity and motherhood!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom transgression hath been absolved:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom Paradise is opened!  
Rejoice; Key to the kingdom of Christ:  
Rejoice; Hope of eternal good things!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION IX  
All the angels were amazed at the great act of Thine incarnation; for they 
saw the Unapproachable God as a man approachable to all, abiding with us, and 
hearing from all: Alleluia! 
IKOS IX  
We see most eloquent orators mute as fish before Thee, O Theotokos; for 
they are at a loss to tell how Thou remainest a Virgin and could bear a child. 
But we, marveling at this mystery, cry out faithfully:  
Rejoice; Receptacle of the Wisdom of God:  
Rejoice; Treasury of His Providence!  
Rejoice; Thou Who showest philosophers to be fools:  
Rejoice; Thou Who exposest the learned as irrational!  
Rejoice; For the clever critics have become foolish:  
Rejoice; For the writers of myths have faded away!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst rend the webs of the Athenians:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst fill the nets of the fishermen!  
Rejoice; Thou Who drawest us from the depths of ignorance:  
Rejoice; Thou Who enlightenest many with knowledge!  
Rejoice; Ship for those who wish to be saved:  
Rejoice; Harbor for sailors on the sea of life!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
KONTAKION X  
Desiring to save the world, He that is the Creator of all came to it according 
to His Own promise, and He that, as God, is the Shepherd, for our sake hath 
appeared unto us as a man; for like calling unto like, as God He heareth: 
Alleluia! 
Then the Choir chanteth the first Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: Rejoice, Thou Bride Unwedded!  
Reader: Holy God ..., Our Father ...,  
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Then the Kontakion of the holy martyrs; in Tone VIII: 
 To Thee, the Planter of creation, * the world doth offer the God-bearing 
martyrs as the first-fruits of nature. * By their supplications, preserve Thy 
Church in perfect peace, ** through the Theotokos, O Greatly-Merciful One.  
Reader: Lord, have mercy (40 times).  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners, Who callest all to salvation through the promise of good things to 
come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life toward Thy 
commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, correct our 
thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, evil and pain. 
Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided by their array, 
we may attain to the unity of the faith and the knowledge of Thine 
unapproachable glory; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Reader: Lord have mercy. (Thrice), Glory ..., Both now ...,  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father (Master) bless! 
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our 
God, have mercy on us. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Reader: Amen, Lord have mercy (12 Times), Save, help, and protect us, O 
Virgin Theotokos. 
The Supplicatory Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos: 
O undefiled, untainted, uncorrupted, most pure, chaste Virgin, Thou Bride 
of God and Sovereign Lady, who didst unite the Word of God to mankind 
through thy most glorious birth giving, and hast linked the apostate nature of 
our race with the heavenly; O Thou who art the only hope of the hopeless, and 
the helper of the struggling, the ever-ready protection of them that hasten unto 
thee, and the refuge of all Orthodox Christians: Shrink not with loathing from 
me a sinner, defiled as I am, and who with polluted thoughts, words, and deeds 
have made myself utterly unprofitable, and through slothfulness of mind have 
become a slave to the pleasures of life. But do thou as the Mother of God Who 
lovest mankind, show thy love for mankind and mercifully have compassion 
upon me a sinner and prodigal, and accept my supplication, which is offered 
unto thee out of my defiled mouth; and making use of thy motherly boldness, 
entreat thy Son and our Master and Lord that He may be pleased to open for 
me the bowels of His loving-kindness and graciousness to mankind, and, 
disregarding my numberless offenses, may He turn me back to repentance, and 
show me to be a tried worker of His precepts. And be thou ever present unto 
me as merciful, compassionate and well disposed; in the present life be thou a 
fervent intercessor and helper, repelling the assaults of adversaries and guiding 
me to salvation, and at the time of my departure taking care of my miserable 
soul, and driving far away from it the dark countenances of evil demons; lastly, 
at the dreadful day of judgment delivering me from eternal torment, show me 
to be an heir of the ineffable glory of thy Son and our God; all of which may I 
attain, O my Sovereign Lady, most holy Theotokos, by virtue of thine 
intercessions and protection, through the grace and love to mankind of thine 
only begotten Son, our Lord and God and Savior, Jesus Christ, to Whom is due 
all glory, honor and worship, together with His beginningless Father, and His 
Most Holy and good and life creating Spirit, Now and ever, and unto ages of 
ages. Amen.  
A Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ, by Antiochus the monk: 
And grant unto us, O Master, in the coming sleep, rest for body and soul, 
and preserve us from the gloomy slumber of sin, and from every dark and 
nocturnal sensuality. Subdue the impulses of passions, extinguish the fiery darts 
of the evil one that are cunningly hurled against us, assuage the rebellions of our 
flesh, and every earthly and fleshly subtlety of ours lull to sleep. And grant unto 
us, O God, a watchful mind, chaste thought, a sober heart, a sleep gentle and 

--- PAGE 25 ---
free from every satanic illusion. Raise us up at the time of prayer firmly 
grounded in Thy judgments. All the night long grant us a doxology, that we may 
hymn and bless and glorify Thy most honorable and majestic name: of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, Now and ever, and unto the ages 
of ages. Amen.  
Most glorious, Ever-Virgin, Mother of Christ God, present our prayer to 
thy Son and our God, that through thee, He may save our souls. 
My hope is the Father, my refuge is the Son, my protection is the Holy 
Spirit: O Holy Trinity, glory to Thee. 
All my hope I place in thee, O Mother of God: keep me under thy 
protection. 
In Thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice, the ranks of Angels and 
the race of mankind; O all-hallowed Temple and spiritual Paradise, boast of 
Virgins. For from thee God became incarnate and He who is our God before 
the ages became a child. He hath made thy womb a throne and rendered it 
wider than the heavens. In thee, O Full of grace, doth all creation rejoice; glory 
be to thee. 
A Prayer to the Guardian Angel: 
O holy angel that standeth by my wretched soul and my passionate life, 
forsake not me a sinner, nor shrink from me because of mine intemperance. 
Give no place for the cunning demon to master me through the violence of my 
mortal body, strengthen my poor and feeble hand, and guide me in the way of 
salvation. Yea, O holy angel of God, guardian and protector of my wretched 
soul and body, forgive me all wherein I have offended thee all the days of my 
life; and if I have sinned in anything this day, protect me during this present 
night, and guard me from every temptation of the enemy, that I may not anger 
God by any sin. And pray to the Lord for me, that he may establish me in His 
fear, and show me, His servant, to be worthy of His goodness. Amen. 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory to Thee. 
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Lord, have mercy. (Thrice), father, bless. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Priest: May Christ our true God, by the prayers of His most pure Mother, of 
our holy and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and 
save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind. 
Choir: Amen. 
Priest: Bless, holy fathers (mothers, brothers and sisters) and forgive me a 
sinner, all wherein I have sinned this day in deed, word, and thought, and by all 
my senses.  
And the brethren (sisters/congregation) reply: 
May God forgive and have mercy on thee, holy father. 
And they make a prostration, asking this forgiveness: 
Bless me, holy father, and forgive all wherein I have sinned this day in deed, 
word, and thought, and by all my senses, and pray for me a sinner. 
Priest: Through His grace may God forgive and have mercy on us all. 
Choir: Amen. 
And the Priest saith this Ektinia: 
Priest: Let us pray for the Orthodox episcopate of the (Jurisdiction) Church; 
for our lord the Very Most Reverend (Patriarch/Metropolitan/Archbishop) 
(Name), First Hierarch of the (Jurisdiction) Church; for our lord the Most 
Reverend (Metropolitan/Archbishop/Bishop N., whose diocese it is) and all 
our brethren in Christ. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (Repeated slowly and with compunction) 
Priest: For the suffering Russian land and its Orthodox people both in the 
homeland and in the diaspora, and for their salvation; for this land, its 
authorities and armed forces, and for every Christian land. 
Priest: For them that hate us and them that love us. 
Priest: For them that are kind to us and them that serve us. 
Priest: For them that have asked us unworthy ones to pray for them. 
Priest: For the deliverance of the imprisoned. 
Priest: For our fathers and brethren that have passed on before us. 
Priest: For those sailing upon the sea. 
Priest: For those bedridden in infirmities. 
Priest: Let us pray for the abundance of the fruits of the earth. 
Priest: And for every Orthodox Christian soul. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Priest: Let us bless pious kings (rulers), Orthodox hierarchs, and the 
founders of this holy habitation. 
Priest: For Our parents, and all that have passed on before us, our fathers, 
brethren, and the for the Orthodox here and everywhere laid to rest. 
Priest: Let us say also for ourselves. 
Choir: Lord, have mercy. (Thrice) 
Then the following Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy 
purity, * Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of 
praise can I offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? I am in doubt and 
stand in awe. * Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of 
Grace.  
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, O Lord Jesus Christ our 
God, have mercy on us. 
Choir: Amen. 
 
 
 
 
