--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT MATINS  
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 6th Kathisma 
from the Psalter, the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone 
of the week. After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VII), the 
Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone I: 
O glorious apostles, * firmly established by the might of the Cross, * you 
have destroyed the falsehoods of the enemy, * interceding on behalf of our 
souls. * Wherefore ye rejoice today in its veneration, * praying on our behalf 
unto Him ** Who alone is the Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
O Mary, holy tabernacle of the Master, * raise us up who have fallen into the 
pit, * of wicked despair, transgressions and afflictions; * for thou art the 
salvation, * the help and the mighty protection of sinners, ** and thou dost save 
thy servants. 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VIII), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone VII: 
Beholding, O Lord, Thy Cross before us today, * we approach it in faith 
with hymns and songs, * adoring it in reverent fear and joy. * Do Thou sanctify 
Thy servants and grant peace to Thy World * by its manifestation before us, ** 
for Thou alone art plenteous in mercy. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII: 
O Lord, we are Thy people and the sheep of Thy pasture; * bring us back, 
who have strayed into corruption; * and as a Shepherd gather us the scattered 
sheep together; * and have mercy on Thy flock O Lover of mankind, * and by 
the intercessions of the Theotokos have compassion upon us, ** for Thou 
alone art free from sin.  
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; for those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE IV 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: On divine watch let the God-inspired Habakkuk stand with us, * 
and show forth the light-bearing angel clearly saying: * Today salvation 
is come to the world, * for Christ is risen * as Almighty. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
O Holy Cross, which grantest us sanctifying grace, thou art the firm 
foundation and glory of the apostles, placed before us for our adoration today, 
thou art exalted throughout the whole inhabited world; lightening the burden of 
the season of the Fast for us. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Moses foreshadowed the Cross, stretching out his arms and defeating 
Amalek. Let us emulate him, stretching out our arms in fasting and prayer, that 
we may conquer the host of demons, who from malicious envy ever war against 
us. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
With the divine plough of the Cross ye have tilled the earth O disciples of 
God, making it fruitful with the harvest of true piety. Wherefore singing your 
praises, we ever glorify Christ. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
O Mother of the good and loving God, fill my soul to overflowing with 
goodness, which the evil one hath corrupted by wicked habits, miserably 
deceiving me; that being found worthy of salvation, I may ever sing Thy praises 
O exceedingly hymned one. 
 
Another canon, by Theodore, in Tone VII: 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Irmos: Assured of Thy coming in the flesh, O Christ ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thine all-holy Cross hath been placed before us today: let us approach and 
venerate it, for it is the horn of our salvation.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
When thy grace and image doth come, it scattereth the dark multitude of 
demons. O Cross of Christ, thou art an invincible weapon.  
Glory ..., Unity in Essence, Trinity of Hypostases, I praise and I honour 
Thee, the Father, Son and Most holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O all-immaculate Maiden, without knowing a 
man thou hast conceived God, who doth hold the ends of the earth in the 
hollow of His hand. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O apostles, intercessors for the world, pray ye that we also may be saved, 
who hold the Cross of Christ as our weapon. 
Katavasia: Assured of Thy coming in the flesh, O Christ, * the Prophet 
Habakkuk cried aloud: * Glory to Thy power O Lord. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: This chosen and holy day * is the first of the Sabbaths, * the 
queen and lady, * the feast of feasts, * and the festival of festivals, * 
wherein we bless Christ throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Rejoice, O divine tripartite Cross; upon which One of the Trinity was 
affixed in the flesh, Who hath delivered us prisoners, from the abyss of 
godlessness, wherefore we supremely exalt Him throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Receiving power and strength through the Cross, the disciples of the Word 
set free those held fast in the bitter bondage of the evil one, hymning Thy 
praise: “We supremely exalt Thee throughout the ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Woe is me! How fearful shall be that judgment seat upon which Thou shalt 
sit, O Word, revealing to me my hidden deeds, exposing before all my lack of 
spiritual sense! But, O Christ, since Thou art by nature merciful, spare me then. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: Without departing from the bosom of the Father, O Jesus, 
Thou didst rest on the bosom of the Virgin; for the restoration of the race of 
mankind, whose nature, in Thy tender compassion, Thou didst assume; 
wherefore mankind doth sing Thy praises throughout the ages. 
Second canon, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
We reverently honor the week of the veneration of the Cross; as one in 
which we fall down and worship the precious Wood and cry aloud: “O ye 
priests praise and ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
How strange is this wonder, O King of the ages! For we Thy servants have 
been granted to behold and venerate the Wood upon which Thou hast been 
crucified. Wherefore with reverent fear we sing Thy praises throughout the 
ages. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
O Holy and consubstantial Trinity, the Father, Son and Most holy Spirit, I 
glorify Thine undivided dominion, and sing the praises of Thine only Kingdom 
throughout all ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Having created Adam in His image, and having 
assumed Adam’s nature He came forth to free him from the curse. “O ye 
priests praise and ye people supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
As the twelve-stringed harp of the Church, O apostles, ye sing the praises of 
the Word of wisdom. Entreat Him, that those who honour you may behold the 
Passion of the Lord and glorify Him throughout the ages. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: The King of glory, who is alone without beginning, * Before 
Whom all the powers of heaven stand in awe * and the hosts of angels 
tremble: * O ye priests praise and ye people * supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages. 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, * for the glory of the Lord hath 
arisen upon thee; * dance now and be glad, O Zion, * and do thou exult, 
O pure Theotokos, * in the arising of Him Whom thou didst bear. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
O Church of God, be thou radiant with joy, illumined by the rays of the 
Cross exalted by thee before all, for the veneration of all the faithful; and ye 
hosts of demons - full of darkness, be ye scattered. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
The divine Cross is the might of abstinence, the strength of those who fast, 
the champion of those who struggle; wherefore, gathering before it with all the 
faithful, let us joyfully fall down and worship it. 
Refrain: Apostles of Christ pray to God for us. 
O glorious apostles, divine foundations of the Church of Christ, preserve us 
all upon the sure foundation of true piety, and establish us upon the firm rock 
of Him who hath chosen you. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O pure One, at the behest of the Archangel thou didst 
conceive Joy: grant that soul-destroying melancholy be banished from my heart, 
and replaced with the sorrow that bringeth joy, that I may receive the Divine 
comforter. 
Second canon, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Thou O most pure Mother and Virgin ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Prefiguring the truth that was to come, O precious Wood, of old thou didst 
make sweet the waters of Marah. Make sweet my abstinence, O Cross of Christ, 
which I venerate today.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou art the unconquerable weapon of the King, the strength of his army, 
the firm foundation of his council. O Cross of Christ, and in our hymns we 
magnify thee. 
Glory ..., Thee, the beginningless Father and Master, coeternal Word and 
Holy Spirit, with all the faithful in true reverence, do we magnify. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thee, the glorious and only Theotokos, who hast 
contained within Thy womb, the Word whom nothing can contain, giving birth 
to Him in the flesh, do we magnify in our hymns. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
With your fiery tongues, O apostles, ye have burnt up all deception and 
planted true piety throughout the World, wherefore in our hymns we magnify 
you.  
Katavasia: Thou O most pure Mother and Virgin, * didst contain within 
thy womb the Word Whom nothing can contain, * and didst give birth to 
Him in the flesh. * In our hymns we magnify thee. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VII: 
Let us O ye faithful, strive to emulate the repentance of the Publican, * and 
not the vain boasting of the Pharisee; * rather, let us offer cries of sorrow from 
the depth of our heart, * to the compassionately loving God of all. * For He 
Himself hath given us this commandment, saying: * “Every man that exalteth 
himself shall be abased, * and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted; * 
wherefore with one accord let us cry unto Him: ** God be merciful to us 
sinners and save us. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Let us O faithful, strive to emulate the repentance ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VII: 
Breathing one purpose and looking to a single hope, * vying with each other 
in the end of their lives, * the passion-bearers looked upon death for Christ as 
the only entry into life. * O strange Wonder! Though the tortures may have 
been suspended, * they seized hold of them as men seize hold of treasure, * 

--- PAGE 7 ---
saying one unto another: * “Even though we may not die today, * yet in 
concordance with the laws of life * a day shall come in which we shall surely 
pass. * Let us turn that which is inevitable, * into something of generous love; * 
let us willingly make our own that which is the fate of all, * and let us purchase 
life with death.” ** By their intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII: 
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, * grant peace to the life of us who 
cry unto Thee: ** O merciful Lord, glory be to Thee!  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father .., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 

--- PAGE 8 ---
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. With the reading of 
the 9th Kathisma. The 10th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 11th at 
the Sixth Hour. The 12th Kathisma is read at the Ninth Hour. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone VI: 
We venerate Thy Cross, O Master, * and we glorify Thy holy Resurrection.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: God is our King before the ages, * He hath wrought 
salvation in the midst of the earth. 
Verse: O God, why hast Thou cast us off unto the end? Why hath Thine 
anger raged against the sheep of Thy pasture? 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (28: 14 - 22) 
Thus saith the Lord: hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule 
this people which is in Jerusalem. Because ye have said, We have made a 
covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our 
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: Therefore thus saith the 
Lord GOD, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a 
precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste. 
Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the 
hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding 
place. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement 
with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then 
ye shall be trodden down by it. From the time that it goeth forth it shall take 
you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall 
be a vexation only to understand the report. For the bed is shorter than that a 
man can stretch himself on it: and the covering narrower than that he can wrap 
himself in it. For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth 
as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring 
to pass his act, his strange act. Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your 
bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts a 
consumption, even determined upon the whole earth. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: But as for me, I will rejoice for ever; I will chant unto the 
God of Jacob. 
Verse: We will confess Thee, O God, we will confess Thee, and we will 
call upon Thy name. 
 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
THURSDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, two by St. Joseph, in Tone IV: 
O ye faithful, having been deemed worthy to adore the ever-blessed Cross, * 
whereby Thou hast saved us, O Lord, * we hymn Thy loving-kindness * and 
fervently entreat Thee: * Bestow upon us all, O Savior, * the joy of Thy 
salvation, * granting us to look in penitence ** upon Thy Resurrection and 
Thine honorable sufferings. 
Outstretched upon the Cross, * Thou didst endure death, * slaying death 
and raising up the dead by Thy life-bearing word. * Wherefore I entreat Thee: * 
restore my soul to life O Lord, * deadened as it is through sin; * grant me 
compunction, and deliverance from wickedness, * during these Thy holy days 
of abstinence, ** O Lover of mankind. 
One by Theodore, in Tone IV:  
Having deemed us worthy to look upon Thy Holy Cross with joy * and to 
adore it, * we entreat Thee, O God our Savior: * that strengthened by the Fast 
we may come also to Thy most pure Passion. * and falling down, worship and 
praise Thy Crucifixion, * the spear, the sponge and reed, * by which Thou hast 
made us immortal, * leading us back to the sweetness of Paradise, O Lover of 
mankind. ** Wherefore with thanksgiving we now glorify Thee. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion; 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Make your vows and pay them to the Lord our God. 
Verse: In Judea is God known, His name is great in Israel. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (10:32 - 11:9) 
These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their 
nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood. And 
the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech. And it came to pass, as 
they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and 
they dwelt there. And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and 
burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for 
morter. And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may 

--- PAGE 11 ---
reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon 
the face of the whole earth. And the Lord came down to see the city and the 
tower, which the children of men builded. And the Lord said, Behold, the 
people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and 
now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go 
to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not 
understand one another’s speech. So the Lord scattered them abroad from 
thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city. 
Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there confound 
the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad 
upon the face of all the earth. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: With my voice unto the Lord have I cried, * with my 
voice unto God, and He was attentive unto me. 
Verse: In the day of mine affliction, I sought out God. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (13:9 - 14:6) 
The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked shall be put 
out. Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised is wisdom. 
Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished: but he that gathereth by labour 
shall increase. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but when the desire 
cometh, it is a tree of life. Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he 
that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded. The law of the wise is a 
fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. Good understanding giveth 
favour: but the way of transgressors is hard. Every prudent man dealeth with 
knowledge: but a fool layeth open his folly. A wicked messenger falleth into 
mischief: but a faithful ambassador is health. Poverty and shame shall be to him 
that refuseth instruction: but he that regardeth reproof shall be honored. The 
desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is abomination to fools to depart 
from evil. He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of 
fools shall be destroyed. Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall 
be repayed. A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children’s children: and 
the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just. Much food is in the tillage of the 
poor: but there is that is destroyed for want of judgment. He that spareth his 
rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes. The 
righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the belly of the wicked shall 

--- PAGE 12 ---
want. Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down 
with her hands. He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the Lord: but he that 
is perverse in his ways despiseth him. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of 
pride: but the lips of the wise shall preserve them. Where no oxen are, the crib 
is clean: but much increase is by the strength of the ox. A faithful witness will 
not lie: but a false witness will utter lies. A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth 
it not: but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VI: 
Learn from the Lord who hath humbled Himself, * even unto death upon 
the Cross; * learn from Him, O my soul, of the humbling * that cometh from 
being lifted up * and the exaltation that doth come from that humility. * Do not 
exalt thyself in Thy virtues; * do not judge thyself righteous and condemn Thy 
neighbor, * like the vainly boastful Pharisee. * But with Thy humbled mind, 
contemplate only Thine own sins, and cry like the Publican: ** O God, be 
merciful to me a sinner and save me.  
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: Learn from the Lord who hath humbled Himself ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, denied Thee not * and forsook not Thy 
commandments: ** by their intercessions have mercy upon us.  
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Stavrotheotokion: The all-pure One, * upon seeing Thee hanging on the 
Cross, * cried aloud saying: * “What is this strange mystery that I see, O my 
Son? * How canst Thou die upon the Tree, * crucified in the flesh? ** Thou 
Who art the Giver of life.” 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord have mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 14 ---
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Lord have mercy (12 Times) 
O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, 
and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make 
steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every 
defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One 
is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore. (Thrice) 
Psalm 33 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
