--- PAGE 1 ---
SATURDAY IN THE FOURTH WEEK 
AT MATINS  
After the six Psalms and the great Litany, we chant Alleluia (Thrice): 
In Tone II, 
Verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, O 
Lord. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their memorial is unto generation and generation. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Their souls shall dwell among good things. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the following Troparion, in Tone II: 
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, and hierarchs, * venerable monastics and 
righteous men and women, * who having fought the good fight to the end kept 
the faith: * since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, ** we beseech 
you, to pray to Him on our behalf that our souls be saved. 
For the Reposed; Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Remember Thy servants O Lord, * and in Thy love forgive them all their 
transgressions committed in this life, * for there is none sinless but Thee, O 
Lord ** who hast the power to grant rest to the departed. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O holy Mother of the ineffable Light, * with angelic hymns ** we honor and 
magnify thee. 
After the first chanting of the Psalter (the Sixteenth Kathisma) we chant the Sessional 
Hymns of the holy martyrs, in the Tone of the Week. Then the reader begins the Seventeenth 
Kathisma (Psalm 118): 
Verse: Blessed are those that are blameless in the way, who walk in the 
law of the Lord. 
Verse: Blessed are they that search out His testimonies, and seek Him 
with their whole heart. 
And so the reader continues with the first half of the Kathisma down to verse 91; and as 
he reads the Choir chants softly without pause: 
Tone V: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; 
When the reader hath said verse 91, the Choir chants Thrice the two following verses: 
Verse: If Thy law had not been my meditation, then should I have 
perished in my humiliation.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: I will never forget Thy statutes, for in them Thou hast quickened 
me. 
Then the small Litany for the reposed:  
Priest/Deacon: Again and Again ..., 
After this the reader continues with the second half of the Eighteenth Kathisma: I am 
Thine, save me..., while the Choir chants softly without pause:  
Tone V: Save me, O Savior. 
The reader continues to verse 174, and the Choir chants Thrice the II Concluding verses: 
Verse: My soul shall live, and shall praise Thee: and Thy judgments will 
help me. 
Verse: I have gone astray like a lost sheep: O seek Thy servant, for I have 
not forgotten Thy commandments. 
The choir then sings the Evlogitaria of the Reposed, in Tone V: 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
The Choir of the Saints hath found the Fountain of Life * and the Door of 
Paradise. * May I also find the way through repentance. * I am the lost sheep, 
call me, O Savior, and save me. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Ye that have preached the Lamb of God, * and like lambs were slain, O holy 
ones, * translated unto life that ageth not and is everlasting, * fervently entreat 
Him, O ye martyrs, * to grant us forgiveness of our sins 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Ye that have trod the narrow way of sorrow; * all ye that in life have taken 
up the Cross as a yoke, * and have followed Me in faith, * come, enjoy the 
honors and heavenly crowns * which I have prepared for you. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
I am an image of Thine ineffable glory, * though I bear the wounds of sin; * 
take compassion on Thy creature, O Master, * and cleanse me by Thy loving-
kindness; * and grant me the longed-for fatherland, * making me again a citizen 
of paradise. 
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
O Thou Who of old didst fashion me out of nothing, * and didst honor me 
with Thine image divine, * but because of my transgression of Thy 
commandment * didst return me again unto the earth, from which I was taken: 
* Restore to me again Thy likeness, ** that I may be refashioned in that former 
beauty. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Refrain: Blessed art Thou, O Lord; teach me Thy statutes.  
Grant rest, O God, to the souls of Thy servants, * and commit them to 
paradise, * where the choirs of the Saints O Lord, * and of the righteous shine 
as luminaries; * Grant rest, unto Thy departed servants, * overlooking all their 
transgressions. 
Triadicon: 
Glory ..., The triple radiance of the one Godhead * let us piously hymn, 
crying aloud: * Holy art Thou, O beginningless Father, * co-beginningless Son, 
and Divine Spirit; * Do Thou enlighten us who with faith worship Thee ** and 
snatch us from the eternal fire. 
Theotokion: 
 Both now ..., Rejoice, O thou pure one, who hast given birth to God in the 
flesh * for the salvation of all, * and through whom mankind hath found 
salvation; * through thee may we find paradise, ** O Theotokos, pure and 
blessed. 
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia, glory to Thee, O God (Thrice). 
Then the small Litany for the reposed:  
Priest/Deacon: Again and Again ..., 
The Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Grant rest, O our Savior, with the righteous * unto Thy servants, * and settle 
them in Thy courts, * as it is written, overlooking, as Thou art good, * their 
transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, * and all that they have committed 
either in knowledge or in ignorance, * O Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., O Christ God, Who didst shine forth unto the world 
* from the Virgin, * manifesting through her the sons of light, * have mercy on 
us. 
Then Psalm 50. 
The Canons 
Up to and including ODE V, we chant the canon/s from the Menaion, 
with 6 Troparia (including the Irmos), and the Temple’s patronymic 
canon with 4 Troparia. Starting at ODE VI we omit the patronymic 
canon, and use only the first canon from the Menaion with 6 Troparia 
and then the following two four-canticled (ODES 6,7,8, and 9) canons 
from the Triodion, with 8 Troparia. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI,  
By Joseph, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Crossing the sea of life ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O suffering martyrs, having surpassed the limits of the flesh, with great 
patience ye endured the pains of torment, whereby ye assuage all the pain and 
afflictions of those who hymn your praises. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
The army of the holy passion-bearers, together with the countless hosts of 
angels, pray on our behalf to the supremely good God, that we be delivered 
from our countless sins, for they have faithfully served Christ 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
 For the reposed: Having been put to death, O Christ, Thou didst arise from 
Thy sleep in the tomb; and from the abundance of Thy goodness, hast granted 
rest with all the saints to those who have died in the faith. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: God, the Word of God, seeking to make man divine, took flesh 
from thee, O pure one, and was seen as a man. Him do thou entreat without 
ceasing that we find mercy in the hour of judgment. 
Another canon, in Tone IV; 
Irmos: Drowning in the tempest of my sins ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Sparing neither your flesh nor your blood, O saints, ye stood fearlessly in 
the face of every torture, never denying Christ; wherefore He hath bestowed 
crowns from heaven upon you. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Having become enlightened by noetic activity, let us hasten to the solemn 
commemoration of the martyrs, crying aloud with divinely inspired hymns: O 
martyrs of Christ, truly ye shine upon the earth as doth the morning star. 
Glory ..., Holy Trinity, I glorify Thee, the beginningless Nature, one God, 
one Lord, three Hypostases: the Father, Son and Spirit, unbegotten, begotten 
and proceeding, consubstantial and everlasting. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O blessed Bride of God, how hast thou given 
birth without knowing a man and yet, as before, remained a virgin? For thou 
hast given birth to the fearful and marvelous God. Pray that those who hymn 
thee be saved. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the Martyrs: When your limbs were severed, ye rejoiced in the shedding 
of your blood. O ever-glorious martyrs, pray fervently to the Lord on our 
behalf. 
Refrain: Their souls shall dwell among good things. 
For the reposed: Thou hast formed me from the dust of the earth and given 
me life, and hast bidden me to return once more to the earth. Grant rest, O 
Lord, to Thy servants whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, and raise them up 
from corruption. 
Katavasia: Drowning in the tempest of my sins, * and as though 
imprisoned in the belly of the whale, * with the Prophet I cry out to Thee: 
* Raise up my life from corruption, O Lord, and save me. 
The small Litany for the reposed 
Kontakion, in Tone VIII; 
With the Saints grant rest, * O Christ, to the souls of Thy servants, * in a 
place where there is neither * pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, ** but life 
everlasting. 
Ikos: Thou alone art immortal, * who hast created and fashioned man; * but 
we mortals were fashioned from the earth, * and unto earth shall we return, * as 
Thou who fashioned me didst command and say unto me, * “For earth thou art 
and unto earth shall thou return,” * whither all we mortals are going, * making 
our funeral lament the song: ** Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. 
ODE VII 
The canon, in Tone IV 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Putting off corruptible flesh, O sufferers, ye were clothed by God with 
incorruption; and now ye stand in light and joy before Him who for our sake 
assumed flesh from the undefiled Virgin, for Whose sake I, stripped naked by 
sin, have been clothed in the robe of holiness.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
The company of the sufferers, who lived in abstinence, doth strengthen us 
to hasten unhindered along the course of the Fast. For having manfully 
preached Christ in the arena, they now stand before the throne of God, 
crowned and noetically rejoicing with the angels.  
For the Dead: By the prayers of Thy holy martyrs, O God, deem Thy 
servants who have fallen asleep in faith worthy to be citizens of Paradise, and 
the noetic light, that they may ceaselessly cry aloud to Thee: “O God of our 
fathers, Blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: We entreat thee O Virgin, who alone art good by nature, 
cleanse us from our sinfulness; and fervently pray to Christ, Who by nature is 
exceedingly good, that we may complete the time of abstinence doing good, and 
that we may sing unto Him: “ O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.” 
Another canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: Thou didst speak with Moses on the mountain, 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Thou hast magnified all Thy saints, and through signs made them honored 
throughout all the world; Ever blessed art Thou O Lord, the God of our 
fathers. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Having endured every form of torture, ye refused to bend the knee to Baal; 
for which ye have received crowns of glory from God, O martyrs of Christ. 
Glory ..., O Essence worshipped as the Trinity in Unity, the Father, Son and 
Spirit, protect those who sing Thy praises, O God of our fathers. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The Virgin Mother, the all-effulgent Maiden, our 
only mediator before God: O Lady, never cease to pray that we may be saved. 
Refrain: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous. 
To the Martyrs: Having fought for the immortal King, O martyrs, and 
shown perfect faith in Him, ye shed your blood for His sake. 
Refrain: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
 For the reposed: In a place where Thy living light doth shine, grant repose 
to Thy faithful servants whom Thou hast translated from things temporal, O 
Lord God of our fathers. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Katavasia: Thou didst speak with Moses on the mountain * and prefigure 
the Virgin in the bush: * O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
The first canon, in Tone IV 
Irmos: Standing before Thee in flames of fire..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O greatly glorified sufferers of Christ, honored by God, we all praise your 
memory; by your mighty prayers deliver us from the heavy guilt of sin, and 
from torment in the life to come. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Holy and chosen ones of Christ God, firm and steadfast army of Martyrs, 
sanctify our mind and heart in these holy days of the Fast by your holy prayers. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
 For the reposed: O Christ our Lord, deliver from the tormenting worm, 
from the gnashing of teeth and the outer darkness, the faithful whom Thou hast 
taken; and make them dwell where the light of Thy countenance shineth 
throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O pure Theotokos, having beheld the Cross of Christ and 
fallen down and sincerely worshiped it, by thy prayers to the Master deem us 
worthy to be cleansed from the passions, and behold His Holy Passion. 
Second canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: The earth and all that is therein, the seas and all wellsprings ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O good and profitable exchange! By your death ye have gained life, O holy 
martyrs of Christ; in no way fearing fire, and sword, the cold and wild beasts, 
but rather crying aloud: “Praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
The choir of angels on high and we here on earth below glorify your 
awesome sufferings and the manliness of your struggles, O martyrs of Christ; 
and we bless, and praise the Lord, and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Light and Life, one Life and three, the Father, the Son and the Spirit 
proceeding from the Father, I honour Thee, one God and Essence in three 
Hypostases, and I sing: I bless and praise Thee, O Lord, and supremely exalt 
Thee throughout all ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: What man born on earth will not praise thee, O 
pure and undefiled Dove? For thou hast conceived the great Light, the richness 
of life, Jesus the Savior. Whom we hymn praising as Lord, and supremely exalt 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
To the Martyrs: O martyrs, we glorify your wondrous struggles and your 
sufferings; we bless and worship God the Benefactor, who hath given you 
strength in the arena; Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Their souls shall dwell among good things. 
 For the reposed: Thou art the Lord and God of death and life, raise up 
those who have died in piety, and make them to dwell in the tabernacles of the 
righteous, as they bless and praise Thee, O Lord, and supremely exalt Thee 
throughout all ages. 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: The earth and all that is therein, * the seas and all wellsprings, 
* the heaven of heavens, light and darkness, * frost and heat, ye sons of 
men, and ye priests, * bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout the ages. 
ODE IX 
The first canon, in Tone IV 
Irmos: For the Mighty One hath done great things to me, * and holy is 
His name; * and His mercy is upon them that fear Him * unto 
generation and generation. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O sufferers of Christ, ye are like stars affixed in the firmament; illumine our 
thoughts and grant us strength to do the pure and radiant will of God. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O noble sufferers of the Lord, ye are like swords that slay the enemy: by 
your protection deliver us from the arrows of the evil one.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
 For the reposed: O exceedingly good and compassionate Lord, grant rest in 
the bosom of Abraham to Thy servants who have departed from us and gone 
to be with Thee in faith, O Creator of all. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O pure one, who in a manner transcending understanding didst 
give birth to God in the flesh, put to death the movements of my flesh and 
enlighten my understanding, for thou art a pure cloud of Light. 
Second canon, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: We all magnify Thy love for mankind ..., 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
We all hymn your memory, O all-famed martyrs, and beholding your 
struggles in the arena where ye suffered, we magnify Christ. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
In the midst of their sufferings the passion-bearers said one to another: “Let 
us not spare the flesh, but come, let us die for Christ that we may eternally live 
in joy.” 
Glory ..., O Trinity one in Essence, the Father unbegotten, the Son begotten 
and the Spirit proceeding from the Father: in Thy mercy keep from harm those 
who hymn Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice, O most pure all-honored Mary, the 
glory of virginity, the firm foundation of mothers, the helper of mankind, the 
joy of the world, Mother and Handmaiden of our God. 
Refrain: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous. 
To the Martyrs: O ye choirs of saints, accept my prayer; and insofar as I 
have been counted worthy to adore the Cross, pray to Christ that I may also 
worship at His holy Passion. 
Refrain: Blessed are they Whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
 For the reposed: Forgive and pardon O compassionate One, those who 
have gone to dwell with Thee O Lover of mankind, and grant them rest in the 
tabernacles of the elect; for Thou art Life and the Resurrection. 
Katavasia: We all magnify Thy love for mankind, O Christ our Savior. * 
Thou art the glory of Thy servants and the crown of the faithful, * who 
magnify the memory of her who gave birth to Thee. 
The small litany. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos (Twice). Then the 
following: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone III: 
As Thou art God Who hast authority over both the living and the dead, * 
grant rest to Thy servants in the dwelling-place of the elect, * for though they 
have sinned, O Savior, ** yet they did not turn away from Thee. 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera to the Martyrs (In the Tone of the week - see 
the Addendum). 
Glory ..., (From the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week): 
 Both now ..., Theotokion (From the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week):  
The Litany: Let us complete ..., 
Then: 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
The Troparion in Tone II: 
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, and hierarchs, * venerable monastics and 
righteous men and women, * who having fought the good fight to the end kept 
the faith: * since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, ** we beseech 
you, to pray to Him on our behalf that our souls be saved. 
For the reposed, Glory ..., in Tone II: 
Remember Thy servants O Lord, * and in Thy love forgive them all their 
transgressions committed in this life, * for there is none sinless but Thee, O 
Lord ** who hast the power to grant rest to the departed. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
O holy Mother of the ineffable Light, * with angelic hymns ** we honor and 
magnify thee. 
The Litany: Have mercy on us ..., Then the usual Dismissal. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
AT LITURGY 
The Typica and the Beatitudes. On the Beatitudes we chant 6 Troparia in 
the Tone of the week from the Oktoechos. 
At the Entrance, the Troparion in Tone II: 
Apostles, martyrs, prophets, and hierarchs, * venerable monastics and 
righteous men and women, * who having fought the good fight to the end kept 
the faith: * since ye have boldness in the presence of the Savior, ** we beseech 
you, to pray to Him on our behalf that our souls be saved. 
In Tone II: 
Remember Thy servants O Lord, * and in Thy love forgive them all their 
transgressions committed in this life, * for there is none sinless but Thee, O 
Lord ** who hast the power to grant rest to the departed. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
With the Saints grant rest, * O Christ, to the souls of Thy servants, * in a 
place where there is neither * pain, nor sorrow, nor sighing, * but life 
everlasting. 
 Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
In thee we have a wall and a haven * and an intercessor acceptable to God, 
Whom thou didst bear, * O Theotokos unwedded, ** salvation of the faithful. 
Prokeimenon:  
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: Be glad in the Lord and rejoice, * ye 
righteous. 
Verse: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: Their souls * shall dwell among good things. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (6:9 – 12) 
Brethren, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany 
salvation, though we thus speak. For God is not unrighteous to forget your 
work and labor of love, which ye have shewed toward his name, in that ye have 
ministered to the saints, and do minister. And we desire that every one of you 
do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end: That ye 
be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit 
the promises. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
 1ST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS (15:47 – 57) 
Brethren: The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord 
from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the 
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image 
of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I say, 
brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth 
corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all 
sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at 
the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised 
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on 
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible 
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, 
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in 
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of 
death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which 
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Alleluia in Tone IV: The righteous cried and the Lord heard them, and 
He delivered them out of all their tribulations. 
Verse: Many are the tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall 
deliver them out of them all. 
Alleluia in Tone VIII: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and 
taken to Thyself, O Lord, and their memorial is unto generation and 
generation. 
 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (7:31 – 37) 
 At that time: Jesus departed from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, and came 
unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. And they 
bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and 
they beseech him to put his hand upon him. And he took him aside from the 
multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue; 
And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, 
Be opened. And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue 
was loosed, and he spake plain. And he charged them that they should tell no 
man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they 
published it; And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all 
things well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
 
 
 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (5: 24-30) 
The Lord spake unto the Jews who came unto Him, saying: Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath 
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death 
unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. 
For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in 
himself; And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is 
the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that 
are in the graves shall hear his voice, And shall come forth; they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the 
resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: 
and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the 
Father which hath sent me. 
 
Communion Verse: Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is meet for 
the upright.  
Communion verse: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and hast 
taken to Thyself, O Lord: and their memorial is unto generation and 
generation. Alleluia (Thrice). 
 
 
 
 
