--- PAGE 1 ---
FOURTH SUNDAY IN GREAT LENT  
COMMEMORATION OF OUR VENERABLE FATHER JOHN OF THE LADDER 
VESPERS: 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 7 Resurrection Stichera. 
And 3 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone VIII; 
Spec. Mel.: “O most glorious wonder ...”: 
O holy father John, * truly didst thou carry upon thy lips the praises of God, 
* having studied with exceeding diligence * the divinely inspired Scriptures O all-
wise one * thou didst enrich thyself with the gifts of grace, * and become a 
blessed one, ** vanquishing all the counsels of the ungodly.  
O most glorious father John, * thou didst cleanse thy soul with the fountain 
of thy tears, * and through the keeping of all-night vigil * thou didst gain God’s 
mercy, * raising thyself on high O blessed one, * to the love of Him and of His 
beauty; * and as is meet thou dost take delight and ever rejoice, * with thy fellow 
strugglers, ** O divinely wise father.  
O venerable father John, * through faith thou didst lift up thy mind on high 
to God; * dead to the never-waning turmoil of this world, * thou didst take up 
thy Cross and follow Him, * Who seeth all things, * bringing into subjection * 
the unruliness of thy body * through ascetic discipline, ** by the power of the 
Divine Spirit.  
 Glory ..., in Tone V:  
O holy father, hearing the voice of the Gospel of the Lord, * and having 
forsaken the riches and glory of this world; * thou didst cry out unto all: * “Love 
God, and ye shall find eternal grace, * esteem nothing higher than His love, * 
that, when He cometh in His glory, * ye may find rest with all the saints.” ** by 
whose prayers, O Christ, do Thou protect and save our souls.  
Both now ..., Dogmatic Theotokion, in the Tone of the week.  
Then “O Joyous Light ...”: 
The Prokeimenon: “The Lord is King ...,” with its verses.  
The Resurrection Aposticha, in the Tone of the week. Then: 
Glory of the venerable one ..., in Tone II:  
Let us offer honor unto John, * an angel upon the earth and a man of God 
in the heavens, * adornment of the whole world, * joy of the good and boast of 
virtuous ascetics. * For planted in the house of God * he hath blossomed forth 
with holiness, * and like a cedar in the desert * he hath increased the flock of 
Christ ** in ascetic sanctity and righteousness.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., in Tone II: 
O new wonder greater than all the wonders of old! * For who hath ever 
known a mother to give birth without having known a man, * and to bear on her 
arm Him Who sustaineth all creation? * Yet it was the will of God to be born. * 
O most pure one, who carried Him as an infant in Thine embrace * and before 
Whom thou hast a mother’s boldness: * cease not to pray on behalf of those 
who honor thee, ** that He have compassion and save our souls. 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then, in Tone IV: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, * O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; * blessed art thou among women, * and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, * 
for thou didst bear the Savior of our souls. (Thrice) 
 Blessed be the Name of the Lord, and the rest. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
AT MATINS 
On “God is the Lord ...,” the Resurrection Troparion, (Twice) 
Glory ..., Troparion of the venerable one in Tone I:  
A dweller in the wilderness and an angel in the body! * Thou wast manifest a 
wonderworker, O John our Godbearing Father! * Thou didst receive heavenly 
gifts through fasting, vigil, and prayer: * healing the infirm and the souls of those 
who flee to thee with faith. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * 
Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee 
worketh healings for all!  
 Both now ..., in Tone I:  
When Gabriel announced to thee, “Rejoice!”, O Virgin, * the Master of all 
became incarnate within thee, the holy tabernacle, * at his cry, as the righteous 
David said. Thou wast shown to be more spacious than the heavens, * having 
borne thy Creator. * Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! * Glory to 
Him Who came forth from thee! ** Glory to Him Who hath set us free by thy 
birthgiving. 
After the 1st and 2nd readings from the Psalter, The Sessional Hymns of 
the Resurrection, in the Tone of the week:  
Then the Resurrectional Verses: (THE EVLOGITARIA) 
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, * teach me Thy statutes; and the rest. 
Then the small Litany and the Sessional Hymn, in the Tone of the week. 
The Hymns of Ascent, and Prokeimenon, in the Tone of the week: Let 
every breath ..., The Sunday Resurrection Gospel.  
Having beheld the Resurrection of Christ ..., 
Psalm 50. Then the following Hymns of compunction, in Tone VIII: 
Glory ..., The gates of repentance, do Thou open unto me, O Giver of Life, * for 
early in the morning my spirit seeketh Thy holy temple, * bearing the temple of 
my body all defiled. * But as One who art compassionate * cleanse it by Thy 
loving-kindness and mercy.  
 Both now ..., Guide me on the paths of salvation, O Theotokos: * for I have 
polluted my soul with shameful deeds * and wasted all my life in slothfulness. * 
but by thine intercessions * do thou deliver me from all impurity.  
In Tone VI:  
Have mercy upon me, O God, * according to Thy great mercy: * and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassion * blot out my transgressions.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
In Tone VIII: As I the wretched one ponder the multitude of evil deeds I have 
done, * I tremble for fear of the dread day of judgment. * But trusting in Thy 
compassionate mercy, * like David do I cry unto Thee: * “Have mercy upon me, 
O God, according to Thy great mercy.”  
After which: “O God, save Thy people ...,” and the canons: 
ODE I 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Unto God the Savior ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Christ, I have become like the man who fell among thieves, and 
grievously beaten, was left barely alive O Savior; and more than he, I am also 
grievously wounded with my sins.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Stripped of all Thy wealth, he cried out lamenting: “O Savior, I am gravely 
wounded; leave me not to the thieves.” Likewise I also pray to Thee: “Merciful 
Lord, save me.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Do Thou heal me who am noetically deadened by the scourging of sin, from 
the unrighteous thieves, my wicked thoughts, O Christ Savior; save me since 
Thou art plenteous in mercy. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O thou who didst inexplicably give birth to the Wisdom and 
Word of the Father, grant healing to my grievously wounded soul, and assuage 
the infirmity of my heart. 
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: Having passed through the water as upon dry land ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
Ascending from the sorrow of things material, O holy John, thou didst dwell 
in the immaterial noetic light: by thine intercessions to the Lord, grant me this 
light.  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Suckled on the sweetness of abstinence, thou didst cast away the bitterness 
of sensuality; and so, father, thou hast granted us a pleasure sweeter than honey 
and the honeycomb.  
Glory..., Having ascended to the heights of the virtues, scorning as 
worthless, sensual pleasures, thou hast appeared to thy flock as the sweetness of 
salvation, O venerable father. 
Both now ..., O thou who ineffably gave birth to the Word and Wisdom of 
the Father, heal thou the harsh wounds of my soul and assuage the infirmity of 
my heart.  
Katavasia in Tone IV: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the 
Spirit, * and utter discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen 
radiantly keeping festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
ODE III 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Do Thou establish us O God our Savior ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
I have wickedly journeyed on the path of life, O Christ, and been sorely 
wounded by thieves through my passions: but I beseech Thee, raise me up.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Thieves have robbed my mind and, wounded by my sins, leaving me barely 
alive: but do Thou heal me, O Lord.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
I have been stripped bare of Thy commandments by the passions O Christ 
Savior, and I have been scourged by sensual pleasures, but do Thou pour upon 
me Thy mercy. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
 
Theotokion: Without ceasing Pray, O pure one, unto Him who came forth 
from thy womb, that those who sing thy praises may be delivered from the wiles 
of the evil one. 
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: Thou art the strengthening of all who come to Thee ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 6 ---
With the fiery coal of thine asceticism, O saint, thou hast burnt up the 
thorns of the passions, warming all those who follow the monastic life.  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
The aroma of the sanctifying myrrh of thine ascetic struggles, O venerable 
father, Hath filled all with the odor of the spiritual fragrance of God. 
Glory..., Attentively learning the laws of ascetic struggle, thou didst burn up 
the passions, as though another army of Pharaoh, by the flow of thy tears. 
Both now ..., Do thou put a stop the restless tumult of my thoughts, O pure 
one, and guide me, O Mother of God, to thy Son.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Truly hath the Lord placed thee * in the firmament * like an immovable star 
of abstinence * shedding its light upon all creation, ** O father John our teacher.  
Ikos: Truly, O father, thou hast made thyself into a temple of God, adorned 
through thy divine virtues with faith, hope and true love, as if with gold shining 
from afar; thou hast explained the laws of God, and practiced abstinence as a if a 
bodiless one; having acquired wisdom, courage, chastity and humility, thou hast 
been raised on high, illumined with unceasing prayer, thou hast attained unto the 
tabernacles of heaven, O father John our teacher.  
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Having Thy Most-pure Cross as a weapon of salvation, O Savior, we cry to 
Thee: “O Thou Who willingly didst suffer for our sake, save us, O God of all, 
since Thou art plenteous in mercy.”  
Sessional Hymn of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Glory ..., Having ascended to the Heavens, resplendent with virtues and 
holiness, thou hast properly entered into the boundless depth of the 
contemplation of God. Having defeated all the snares of the demons, and 
protecting mankind from their wickedness, O John - ladder of the virtues - thou 
dost ever intercede on behalf of thy servants, that they be saved.  
Both now ..., He Who is enthroned upon the cherubim and Who dwelleth 
in the bosom of the Father, hath sat incarnate in thy bosom, O Lady, as upon 

--- PAGE 7 ---
His holy throne. For as God He is the ruler of all nations, and with 
understanding we now sing unto Him; beseech Him O pure one, on behalf of 
thy servants that they be saved.  
ODE IV 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: I heard the rumor of Thy plan ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Thieves have despoiled me of my godly actions and left me wounded and in 
pangs. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
My unstable thoughts have stripped me bare of Thy commandments, O 
Savior, and I have been scourged by my transgressions.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Levite, when he saw me wounded, passed me by, O Savior; but do 
Thou save me.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Regally do we glorify thee O unwedded Theotokos, and we the 
faithful flee to thy safe haven for refuge. 
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of Thy plan ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
Thou art a fragrant flowered meadow and a living paradise of the virtues, in 
which abstinence doth blossom; and with which thou dost nourish all who honor 
thee.  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
As a lawgiver for ascetics, and a most meek rule for monastics, thou art truly 
like Moses and David, O father, wherefore we bless thee. 
Glory..., Planted by the waters of abstinence, thou hast been revealed O 
blessed one, to be a vine blossoming with, and bearing, the grapes of piety. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
 Both now ..., Within time, O Mother of God, thou didst bear for us Him 
Who hath shone forth timelessly from the Father. Entreat Him to save those 
who sing thy praises.  
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * 
Jesus the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands 
he hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
ODE V 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Having arisen early I cry unto Thee O Lord ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
O Jesus, bind the wounds of my soul, as of old the Samaritan did to him 
that fell among thieves, and heal me from my pain, I pray Thee, O my Christ.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Sickened by the wounds of my transgressions, I lay helpless, O my Christ, 
naked and bereft of the divine virtues; but I beseech Thee, do Thou save me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
When the priest and the Levite saw me, they could not help me, but passed 
by on the other side. But since Thou art compassionate Thou hast granted me 
salvation and saved me.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: I beseech Thee O Lord, Turn not away from me, wretched as I 
am, for my mind is painfully scourged by noetic thieves, but do Thou have 
compassion upon me O Savior, by the prayers of her who gave birth to Thee. 
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: A strange darkness hath overcome me ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
O blessed father, thou didst quench all the passions with the dew of thine 
ascetic struggles, abundantly aflame with love and faith thou wast a lamp of 
abstinence, a light of dispassion, and a child of the day.  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
With thy divine husbandry, O father, thou didst tend to the grapes of faith; 
and gathering them into the winepress thou hast pressed them out by thine 
ascetic labors; making glad the heart of thy flock.  
Glory..., Having well withstood the assaults and the wounds of thine 
enemies, thou wast revealed to be a pillar of patience, strengthening thy flock 
thou hast guided them with thy blessed staff, nourishing them on the waters of 
abstinence, O blessed one. 
 Both now ..., As spoken by thine own lips, we emulate thee, O all-pure one, 
and call thee blessed. For the Lord hath indeed done great things unto thee and 
hath magnified thee as the true Mother of God, born from thy womb.  
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O 
Virgin who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the 
God of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon 
all who hymn thee. 
ODE VI 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: An Abyss hath consumed me ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
I have wasted the blessed life given me with passions, O Master, and 
grievously scourged in every part by my transgressions, I turn back to Thee for 
refuge and pray: “Have compassion upon me.”  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Thieves have seized my wealth and left me as one dead, having scourged my 
mind with the passions. But do Thou have compassion upon me and save me, O 
Lord.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Unable to bear the sight of my pain and wounds, the Levite passed me by; 
but do Thou Thyself O Compassionate One, pour on me the oil of Thy great 
mercy. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: As the bush unconsumed by fire, as the mountain and living 
ladder, as the heavenly gate, we worthily glorify thee, Mary most glorious, the 
praise of the Orthodox.  
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Irmos: Cleanse me, O Savior ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
Thou didst receive within thy soul the divine wealth of the Spirit; 
unblemished prayer, purity, modesty, constant watchfulness, the labors of 
abstinence; by which thou hast become a temple of God.  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
O wise one, thou didst pass by material things as worthless, and having 
raised thy mind on high through noetic prayer; by the perfection of thy life thou 
hast manifest thyself as an heir of peaceful repose in the highest.  
Glory..., Thou didst truly extinguish the fiery darts of thine enemies by thine 
ascetic struggles, and having kindled the fire of faith, thou didst burn up the 
boastful unbelief of heresy. 
Both now ..., The majesty of the Most High hath shone forth from Zion; 
through an ineffable union He hath assumed flesh from thee, O undefiled one, 
and shed light upon the world.  
Katavasia: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God 
* O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 
SYNAXARION READING 
Verse: Thou dwellest no longer at thine earthly diocese O John, 
Verse: But thou dost always delight in the vision of Him Who overseeth all. 
On this day, the fourth Sunday of Great Lent, we commemorate our 
venerable Father among the saints, St. John of Sinai, the author of The Ladder of 
Divine Ascent. 
No one knows the birthplace or parentage of our venerable Father John of 
Sinai. In his youth, at the age of sixteen, he came to the wilderness of Sinai and 
dwelt under the guidance of Abba Martyrius. When Abba Martyrius tonsured our 
venerable Father John at the age of twenty, he took him and went to that pillar 
of the wilderness, Abba John the Sabbaite in the wilderness of Gouda where he 
had with him his disciple Stephen the Cappadocian. When the Sabbaite elder saw 
them, he arose and took water, poured it into a small basin, washed the feet of 
the disciple (the young John) and kissed his hand; but he did not wash the feet of 
Abba Martyrius his superior. Abba Stephen was scandalized by the situation. 
After the departure of Abba Martyrius and his disciple, Abba John noticed that 
his own disciple was greatly perplexed and said to him, “Why are you so 
troubled? Believe me, I do not know who the boy is, but today I received the 

--- PAGE 11 ---
abbot of Sinai and washed his feet.” After forty years, he did indeed become the 
abbot according to the prophecy of the elder. After the passing of his spiritual 
father, St. John continued alone in the wilderness in a cave in Wadi-Thola. He 
traveled from time to time, going at least once as far as Alexandria. He records 
in The Ladder his visit to a large monastic community there and the marvels of 
repentance, obedience, and humility which he observed. In his humility, he 
counted our venerable George the Wonderworker of Arselaou as his master. In 
all, he spent some forty years in solitude and stillness. He guided the monks who 
dwelt in that desert since he was a most excellent and nurturing spiritual father – 
for in those days there were innumerable ascetics living in cells all through the 
mountains and valleys of Sinai. From time to time, he received visitors froih 
farther away. At one point, some other monks, prompted to jealousy by the 
adversary who hates all good, complained of Abba John’s fame and teaching. In 
response, he humbly kept strict silence for over a year, until the same fathers 
who had complained came, asking him to speak again for the benefit of all. After 
he had spent forty years in the wilderness, the monks of Sinai asked him to 
become abbot of the great monastery built by the emperor Justinian beside the 
Burning Bush of Moses, the Holy Monastery of St. Catherine. In obedience to 
the fathers, he left his blessed solitude to take up the responsibilities of abbot. It 
is told that on the very day on which he assumed the office of abbot, there came 
a group of about six hundred pilgrims. When they were seated, our venerable 
Father John saw someone in the crowd with short hair and wearing a Jewish 
tunic. This person was going about like someone with authority, directing the 
cooks, the stewards, the storekeepers, and other workers. After the people left, 
when the servers all sat down to eat, they sought everywhere for the one who 
had been going about supervising, but did not find him. Then the servant of 
God, our venerable Father John, said, “Let him go. The lord Moses did nothing 
strange in this same place where he served before and which belongs to him.” O, 
the wonder! It had been the Holy Prophet and Lawgiver Moses who had served 
the guests. At the request of Abba John, abbot of Raith near the shore of the 
Red Sea, our venerable father wrote his wonderful book, The Ladder of Divine 
Ascent, in which he sets out the whole of Christian life as a divine ascent of thirty 
rungs to Christ. This book has been a treasure, a pearl beyond price, to this day. 
It is useful not only to monastics but to all devout Christians. He also wrote, for 
Abba John, a shorter exhortation, “To the Shepherd,” in which he set out the 
stature and work of the father and shepherd of souls who must guide, not so 
much by words but by the light of holiness in which he lives. St. John was a true 
physician of souls and had great spiritual insight into men's behavior. He made 
detailed observations of the symptoms of men's sin-sick souls, diagnosed their 

--- PAGE 12 ---
spiritual diseases, and prescribed the appropriate medicine for their recovery and 
salvation. He showed how one can ascend the “ladder of the virtues” step by 
step and reach the Promised Land, fleeing the Egypt of the passions. Yet, his 
success was due only to his own life of constant watchfulness, fasting, vigils, and 
prayer. The monastic community he shepherded continues to this day beside the 
Burning Bush, and his teachings guide and direct monastics throughout the 
world. During Great Lent, The Ladder is read aloud in monasteries during meals 
so the monastics may receive his edifying spiritual counsels for their souls’ 
sustenance, as they simultaneously receive physical nourishment for their bodies. 
Today, the cave in which he dwelt in the wilderness of Sinai I can still be seen, 
but his resting place is unknown except to the angels. He fell asleep in the Lord 
in the seventh century. St. John is also commemorated on March 30, the day of 
his repose. 
 О Christ our God, through the intercessions 
of our venerable Father John of The Ladder, 
have mercy on us and save us. Amen. 
ODE VII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: The highly exalted Lord of our fathers ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Thieves fell upon me, wretch that I am, and left me with wounds as one 
dead; wherefore I pray unto Thee: O God come Thyself and visit me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
My mind, ceaselessly robbed by my thoughts, hath pierced me through with 
the passions, and because of the multitude of my transgressions, left me as one 
dead. But do Thou O Savior, grant me healing.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Having seen me ailing with painful wounds, the Levite could not bear to 
look upon me, thinking my wounds incurable, and passed me by O my Savior, 
but do Thou Thyself grant me healing 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having taken flesh from the Virgin, Thou hast saved me, in 
Thy compassion pouring upon my wounds Thy rich mercy, O Christ, wherefore 
I glorify Thee. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: Having gone down to Babylon from Judea ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
Into the fair meadows of the Kingdom on high, Thou hast lead thy flock to 
pasture, O father, and with the rod of true dogma thou hast driven away the wild 
beasts of heresy; chanting: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
Thou hast entered on high, into the heavenly bridal chamber of Christ the 
King, clothed in a garment worthy of Him that hath called thee; and seated 
therein, thou dost cry aloud: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Glory..., Thou art a river of abstinence unpolluted by sin O father; purging 
the thoughts and cleansing the filth of those, who sing with faith, “O God of our 
fathers, blessed art Thou.” 
Both now ..., The Lord of all came forth from thy womb, taking flesh from 
thee, O Virgin. Wherefore with true Orthodox faith we honor thee as the 
Theotokos, and cry aloud to thy Son: “O God of our fathers, blessed art Thou.”  
Katavasia: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * 
the divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
The Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection in the Tone of the week. 
ODE VIII 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: The Youths in the fiery furnace ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
From the noetic thieves of my thoughts, O Savior, I have been robbed, and 
from the wounds of my transgressions, my life hath wasted away, from whence I 
have been stripped of the divine image of Thee O God, Who lovest mankind, 
but do Thou have compassion upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Thou didst come down from on high to the earth, O Savior, and have 
compassion upon me, and as I lay wholly wounded by the scourging of sin O 
Compassionate One; Thou hast poured the oil of Thy mercy upon me, O Christ.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
For my sake, O Master and Savior, Thou hast given Thy soul and body over 
to deliver me, and save me, who lay incurably wounded by the sword of my sins, 
since Thou art Compassionate.  
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Transcending all understanding hast thou given birth to the 
Lord, God-man and Word, yet remaining a virgin; wherefore, O Virgin, with all 
creation we bless and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: The King of glory ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
An image and living pillar of abstinence art thou shown to be in truth O 
father, wherefore we honor thy memory O John. 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
The multitudes of monastics rejoice, and the assembly of venerable saints 
and righteous dance with gladness: for thou hast justly received a crown with 
them.  
Refrain: Let us bless Father, Son, Holy Spirit, the Lord.  
Adorned with the virtues, thou hast entered into the ineffable glory of the 
noetic bridle-chamber singing hymns in praise of Christ throughout the ages. 
Both now ..., Reject us not, O Virgin, for we are in need of thy help; and we 
sing in praise of thee and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Stichera: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, chanting and 
supremely exalting Him throughout all ages.  
Katavasia: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat)  
ODE IX 
The appointed canons from the Oktoechos. Then: 
The first canon from the Triodion, in Tone V: 
Irmos: O Isaiah, dance now and be glad! ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
I have knowingly not kept Thy commandments O Lord, and following the 
passionate impulses of sensual pleasure, I have been stripped of grace, and cast 
out naked. Wherefore I beseech Thee O Savior, do Thou save me 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
The Levite could not cleanse my wounds, but as one who hath suffered with 
me, Thou didst come to me O good One, and pouring upon me the mercy of 
Thy compassions; like the best of physicians, Thou hast healed me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me.  
Since Thou art the compassionate One, Thou hast been compassionate to 
me O Christ, and saved me, who wast grievously wounded by thieves O Savior; 
by giving Thy soul and body as the two dinars, in payment for my redemption. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thy birth-giving transcends understanding, O Mother of God, 
for thou didst conceive without knowing a man, and gave birth while remaining a 
virgin, having given birth to God, Whom magnifying, we call thee blessed, O 
Virgin.  
Of the venerable one, in Tone VI 
Irmos: With all peoples let us magnify the Pure One ..., 
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
A physician of those sick through sin, O blessed one of God, thou art 
manifest as a slayer and expeller of evil spirits; wherefore we call thee blessed.  
Refrain: Venerable father John, Pray to God for us.  
Leaving the earth wherein corruption dwelleth, thou hast gone to live, O 
father, in the land of the meek, and with them thou dost rejoice in the sweet 
blessings of God.  
Glory..., Today is the day of solemn festivity, for the entire flock of 
monastics hath been called to assemble as a spiritual choir, and liturgizing, 
partake of eternal life.  
Both now ..., Having taken up His abode within thee, O all-immaculate 
One, He who hath overthrown the murderer who maliciously brought about the 
fall of our first parents, hath been born and saved us all.  
Katavasia: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit 
leap for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor 
the holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
The small litany: 
Then, “Holy is our God ...”: (Thrice) 
Exapostilarion for the Resurrection Gospel of the week, then: 
Glory ..., Exapostilarion of the venerable one, in Tone III; 
Thou didst shun worldly ease as enfeebling, * and withering thy flesh with 
fasting, * thou didst renew the strength of thy soul, O venerable one, * gloriously 
enriching thyself with heavenly glory, ** wherefore cease not to intercede on our 
behalf, O John.  
 Both now ..., in the same Tone; 
Saved by thee, O Lady, we nobly confess Thee to be the very Theotokos, * 
for inexpressibly Thou didst bear God, * Who hath destroyed death by the Cross 
* and called to Himself the assemblies of venerable saints, ** wherefore we, with 
them, offer praises to Thee, O Virgin.  
On the Aposticha, the 8 Resurrection Stichera. In the Tone of the week, 
with the 7th and 8th verses: 
7th Verse: I will confess Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, * I will tell 
of all Thy wonders. 
8th Verse: I will be glad and rejoice in Thee, I will chant unto Thy name, 
O Most High.  
Then, another from the Triodion, in Tone I: 
9th Verse: Arise, O Lord my God, let Thy hands be lifted high; * forget 
not Thy paupers to the end. 
Come, let us work in the mystical vineyard, * bringing forth fruits of 
repentance therein; * let us not labor for the sake of food and drink, * but 
through prayer and fasting let us increase the virtues. * And the Lord of the 
vineyard, pleased by our labor, will pay us the dinar, * with which He hath 
redeemed our souls from the debt of sin, ** for He alone is rich in mercy.  
 Glory ..., in Tone I: 
Come, let us work in the mystical vineyard, * making the fruit of repentance 
grow within it; * let us not labor for the sake of food and drink, * but through 
prayer and fasting let us gain the virtues. * And the Lord of the vineyard, pleased 
by our labor, will provide the payment, * whereby He doth redeem our souls 
from the debt of sin, ** for He alone is abundantly merciful.  
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone II: 
Thou art most blessed, O Virgin Theotokos, * for through Him who took 
flesh from thee, Hades hath been captured, * Adam recalled, the curse slain, Eve 
set free, * death put to death, and we have been given life. * Therefore in praise 
we cry: ** Blessed art thou, O Christ our God, who hast been thus well-pleased, 
glory be to thee. 
Then the Great Doxology and after it the Resurrection Troparion: 
Before the 1st Hour: Glory ..., Both now ..., Gospel Sticheron for the week. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
AT LITURGY 
Typika, and the Beatitudes: 8 from the Oktoechos, in the tone of the week. 
Order of Troparia & Kontakia for a temple dedicated to a Saint/s:  
Troparion of the Resurrection:  
Troparion of the Temple:  
Troparion of the venerable one, in Tone I: 
A dweller in the wilderness and an angel in the body! * Thou wast manifest a 
wonderworker, O John our Godbearing Father! * Thou didst receive heavenly 
gifts through fasting, vigil, and prayer: * healing the infirm and the souls of those 
who flee to thee with faith. * Glory to Him Who hath given thee strength! * 
Glory to Him Who hath crowned thee! ** Glory to Him Who through thee 
worketh healings for all!  
Kontakion of the Resurrection: 
Kontakion of the Temple:  
Glory ..., Kontakion of the venerable one, in Tone IV: 
Truly hath the Lord placed thee * in the firmament * like an immovable star 
of abstinence * shedding its light upon all creation, ** O father John our teacher.  
Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
O protection of Christians that cannot be put to shame, * O mediation unto 
the Creator unfailing, * disdain not the suppliant voices of sinners, * but be thou 
quick, O good one, to help us who in faith cry unto thee; * hasten to intercession 
and speed thou to make supplication, ** thou who dost ever protect, O 
Theotokos, them that honor thee. 
 
Prokeimenon and Verse in the Resurrection Tone for the week. 
Prokeimenon of the venerable one in Tone VII: The saints shall boast 
in glory, * and they shall rejoice upon their beds. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (DAY) (6:13 – 20) 
Brethren: when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by 
no greater, he sware by himself, Saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and 
multiplying I will multiply thee. And so, after he had patiently endured, he 
obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the greater: and an oath for 
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more 
abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, 

--- PAGE 19 ---
confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was 
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for 
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us: Which hope we have as an 
anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within 
the veil; Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest 
for ever after the order of Melchisedec. 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS (SAINT) (5:9 – 19) 
Brethren: the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and 
truth; Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord. And have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. For it is a shame even 
to speak of those things which are done of them in secret. But all things that are 
reproved are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest is 
light. Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and 
Christ shall give thee light. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but 
as wise, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not 
unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with 
wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit; Speaking to yourselves in 
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart 
to the Lord; 
Alleluia and Verse in the Resurrection Tone of the week:  
Alleluia from the Triodion, in Tone II: 
Verse: They that are planted in the house of the Lord, in the courts of 
our God they shall blossom forth. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (DAY) (9:17-31) 
At that time: one of the multitude said, Master, I have brought unto thee my 
son, which hath a dumb spirit; And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him: 
and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy 
disciples that they should cast him out; and they could not. He answereth him, 
and saith, O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I 
suffer you? bring him unto me. And they brought him unto him: and when he 
saw him, straightway the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed 
foaming. And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto him? 
And he said, Of a child. And oft times it hath cast him into the fire, and into the 
waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, 
and help us. Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are possible to 
him that believeth. And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said 

--- PAGE 20 ---
with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief. When Jesus saw that the 
people came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou 
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into 
him. And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he was as 
one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead. But Jesus took him by the hand, 
and lifted him up; and he arose. And when he was come into the house, his 
disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out? And he said unto 
them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting. And they 
departed thence, and passed through Galilee; and he would not that any man 
should know it. For he taught his disciples, and said unto them, The Son of man 
is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after that he is 
killed, he shall rise the third day. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (SAINT) (4:25 - 5:12) 
At that time: there followed Jesus great multitudes of people from Galilee, 
and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond 
Jordan. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was 
set, his disciples came unto him: And he opened his mouth, and taught them, 
saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed 
are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for they 
shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall 
obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Blessed are 
the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: 
for great is your reward in heaven: 
 
Communion Hymn: Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in 
the highest.  
Another: In everlasting remembrance shall the righteous be; he shall 
not be afraid of evil tidings. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
VESPERS ON SUNDAY EVENING  
(There is no chanting of the Psalter) 
On “Lord I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 4 penitential Stichera, in the Tone 
of the week, and then the following 3 Stichera from the Triodion: 
Two by Joseph, in Tone III: 
O ye faithful, let us take upon ourselves great labors * in this season of 
abstinence, * that we may obtain great glory, * that through the mercy of our 
great God ** we may be delivered from the flames of Gehenna.  
Now that we have passed the midpoint of the Fast, * let us manifest within 
ourselves the beginning of a godly life, * and let us hasten eagerly towards our 
journey’s end; * virtuous living, ** that we may receive the delight that never 
groweth old. 
One by Theodore, in Tone VII: 
Having passed the middle point of the Fast, * let us proceed with joy to that 
which remaineth, * anointing our souls with the oil of almsgiving; * that we be 
deemed worthy to worship the divine Passion of Christ our God, ** and arrive at 
His holy and fearful Resurrection.  
Then 3 Stichera from the Menaion;  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion.  
Entrance with the censer, “O joyous Light ...”: 
Great Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII:  
Prokeimenon: Turn not Thy countenance away from Thy servant, for I 
am afflicted; quickly hearken unto me. * Attend unto my soul and 
deliver it; 
Verse 1: May Thy salvation, O God, be quick to help me.  
Verse 2: Let beggars behold it and be glad.  
Verse 3: Seek after God, and your soul shall live.  
And then once more, Turn not Thy countenance away ..., 
At this point the priest (in the Altar) removeth his Phelonion and 
changeth his Epitrachelion to one of a dark color (black or dark purple); 
The covers on the Icon-stands and the other coverings in the church are 
also changed. 
After “Vouchsafe O Lord ...”:  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Litany: Let us complete ..., 
Note: from this point on, the choir chanteth the responses according to 
the penitential Lenten melody.  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VII:  
Having planted His vineyard and called the laborers, the Savior is close at 
hand. Come, all ye who have striven to keep the Fast, and let us enjoy our 
reward; for the Giver is rich and merciful. After laboring a little, let us receive 
His mercy upon our souls. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her mistress, 
so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity on us.  
 (Repeat): Having planted His vineyard ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud. 
Adam fell among thieving thoughts: his mind was robbed, his soul wounded, 
and he lay naked without help. Neither the priest who was before the Law 
attended to him; nor did the Levite who came after the Law look upon him. 
Thou alone didst help him, O God, Thou who camest not from Samaria but 
from the Theotokos: O Lord glory be to Thee. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: 
Thy martyrs, O Lord, * denied Thee not, nor forsook Thy commandments: 
** by their intercessions have mercy on us.  
Glory from the Menaion, if there is one, otherwise: 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Like the Archangel, * let us the faithful hymn the bridal-chamber of heaven, * 
the portal truly sealed: * Rejoice, for whose sake hath budded forth unto us 
Christ the Savior of all, * the Bestower of life and God! * With thine arm O 
Sovereign Lady * cast down the tyrants, our godless foes, * O most pure one, ** 
O thou hope of Christians!  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart ...,” Trisagion. Then:  
In Tone V: 

--- PAGE 23 ---
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with thee; 
blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for thou 
hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than 
the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the very 
Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim (once only) 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love bestow 
upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee  

--- PAGE 24 ---
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen, Lord, have mercy (Thrice), father 
(master) bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
