--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 4th Kathisma, the 
Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week. After 
the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma V), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone III: 
The most beautiful of seasons hath dawned upon us, * the praiseworthy 
days of abstinence. * O brethren, let us hasten to be cleansed, that we may 
appear in purity before our Creator * and receive His beauty, * by the prayers of 
her who gave birth to Him, ** the only pure Mother of God. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone III: 
Awed by the beauty of thy virginity * and the exceeding radiance of thy 
purity, * Gabriel called out unto thee, O Theotokos: * What worthy hymn of 
praise can I offer unto thee? * And what shall I name thee? * I am in doubt and 
stand in awe. * Wherefore as commanded, I cry to thee: ** Rejoice, O Full of 
Grace. 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VI), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone VII: 
O Lord, having granted us to reach this present day, * on which, radiant 
with illumination * we commence the holy week of the raising of Lazarus, * 
deem us Thy servants worthy * to walk in reverent fear of Thee, ** and so 
complete the course of the Fast. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VII: 

--- PAGE 2 ---
O all-pure Virgin, * thou art greater in honor than the glorious cherubim. * 
For unable to endure the divine splendor, * while performing their ministry, * 
they veil their faces with their immaterial wings; * but with thine own eyes * 
hast thou gazed upon the Incarnate Word, ** ceaselessly pray to Him on behalf 
of our souls. 
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; For those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE I 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone III: 
Irmos: He who of old assembled the waters ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
With the divine ploughshare of the holy Fast, let us till the noetic soil of our 
mind, and thereby reap the sheaf of virtues; that we not hunger eternally, but 
rejoice in gladness with never-waning joy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I bear within me the passions of many years, darkening my wretched soul; O 
timeless Word of the eternal Father, with a contrite heart I fall down before 
Thine unconquerable power, and I pray: Have compassion upon me and save 
me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The holy Fast doth feed our hearts, ripening within us thoughts acceptable 
to God, and drying up the deep abyss of our passions, and with the gentle rain 
of compunction it cleanseth those who with faith offer praise to the Almighty 
One. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Maiden of many names, rejoice holy Virgin! Mary, Birthgiver 
of God, the glory of the faithful, deliverance from the curse, the heavenly 
ladder, and wonder transcending understanding, the un-burnt bush, and untilled 
earth.  
Another canon, by Theodore, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Let us sing of victory unto the Lord ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Having venerated the life-giving Tree, let us, rejoicing, advance now upon 
the path of the Fast to the Passion of Christ. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Following Christ, let us shun the world, and taking up the Cross, let us share 
in His divine passion.  
Glory ..., Let us all sing the praises of the Divinity, supreme in Essence, the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: May He whom thou didst bear in a manner 
transcending understanding, O pure Virgin, Jesus the Savior, be merciful to thy 
servants. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
When Thou comest in glory with the angels to judge the whole world, O 
Christ, grant us to worthily make a good defense before Thee. 
Katavasia: Let us sing a song of victory unto the Lord, * who drowned all 
the power of Pharaoh in the sea: * for He hath been glorified. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone III: 
Irmos: The Babylonian furnace ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Being led astray by the harmful deception of the serpent, I have beguiled my 
mind, and each day I add anguish to my pain. Wherefore I cry to Thee, O 
Savior; O Physician of the sick, come unto me and save me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Of old Elisha raised up the child of the Shunnamite woman, clearly 
strengthened in spirit by fasting. May we the faithful, who have become 
deadened by the pleasures of passion, through the life-giving Fast also regain 
life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Of old, O Lover of mankind, Thou didst save the men of Nineveh when 
they repented with tears and fasting. Do Thou also, O Lord, in Thy mercy be 
compassionate with us, for we are at a loss to confess Thee through our deeds.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: After bearing a child thou didst remain without corruption O 
all-immaculate One, wherefore we pray thee to deliver from corruption thy 
servants who with faith sing in oneness of soul: “Bless ye the Lord, all ye works 
of the Lord.” 
Second canon, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Unto Him before whom the cherubim are in awe ..., 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O ye faithful, strengthened by abstinence with God’s help, let us run the 
remainder of the fast and receive our crown. 
Seeing my soul sickly and bereft of fruit, be patient with me O Christ, and 
cut me not down, like the fig tree which Thou didst curse.  
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
O Sovereign Trinity, Unity in three Hypostases, the Father, the Son and the 
Spirit, deliver from every temptation and danger those who hymn Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice! Mountain of God; Rejoice! ever-radiant 
Lamp; Rejoice! new Heaven; Rejoice! Mind brighter than lightning; Rejoice! 
Temple of the Lord; Rejoice! all-hymned one. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
When I think of Thy dread judgment, O Christ, I am filled with fear and 
trembling, and I cry aloud: “Thou art merciful without measure; do Thou save 
me wretched as I am.” 
Verse: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: Unto Him before whom the cherubim are in awe, * and the 
seraphim filled with wonder, * the Fashioner of the world: * O ye priests 
and servants and spirits of the righteous, * hymn ye, bless ye, and 
supremely exalt * throughout the ages. 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone III: 
Irmos: New is the wonder and befitting of God ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The grace of the Fast hath filled the divine chalice with the wine of 
compunction, calling the faithful together; wherefore we cry out with joy: 
“Come and partake with gladness, lay aside the drunkenness of the passions, 
that ye may be deemed worthy of the comforting joy to come.”  
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
The judgment is near: take heed, O my soul. Be attentive to thy conscience, 
and do good, and it will ever preserve thee uncondemned. For if we judge 
ourselves in this present life, we shall not be judged there, lacking 
compassionate witnesses, where the guilty will be condemned. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Principalities and powers, thrones, seraphim and dominions, authorities and 
cherubim, angels and archangels: pray ye to God that we may complete the time 
of the Fast, doing that which is acceptable to Him, that as servants who have 
pleased Him we may share in glory.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: With the martyrs and the prophets, and all the venerable saints 
accept now the supplications of her who gave birth to Thee, on behalf of us 
Thy servants who have angered Thee, O only Lover of mankind and Master, 
before Whom the hosts of heaven tremble. 
Second canon, in Tone VII: 
Irmos: Mother beyond nature ..., 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us pray that sailing through the tranquility of the Fast, driven by the 
wind of the Spirit, we may attain to the safe-haven of Christ’s Passion. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Imitating the woman of Canaan, I cry aloud to Thee; Have mercy on me, O 
God, Thou Son of David; heal my sick soul, as Thou didst heal her daughter.  
Glory ..., Let us sing the praises of the divine Nature, Unity in three 
Hypostases, the Father, the Son and the Spirit. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou didst conceive within thy womb, and 
without seed didst give birth in the flesh to the uncircumscribed Word, pray 
fervently that our souls be saved. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou didst justify the Publican when he cried; “Be merciful to me”, Grant 
Thy mercy also unto me a sinner, O Judge of all, and forgive me mine offences.  
Katavasia: Mother beyond nature and Virgin by nature * She who alone is 
blessed among Women: * let us the faithful magnify with hymns. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VIII: 
Like the man who fell among thieves, O Master of all, * I have fallen among 
my sins and been cruelly wounded by them. * But leave me not bereft of 
healing, O Lord, * who didst came not from Samaria but from the pure Virgin. 
* O Jesus, who”s name meaneth Salvation, ** have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Like the man who fell among thieves ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
What shall we call you, O saints? * Cherubim, for Christ rested upon you? * 
Seraphim, for ye glorified Him without ceasing? * Angels, for ye have 
renounced the body? * Powers, for ye perform miracles? * Many are your 
names, * but greater are your gifts of grace: ** pray ye that our souls be saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
Those in heaven hymn thee, * O joyously blessed Mother unwedded, * and 
we glorify thine inscrutable birthgiving, O Theotokos; ** pray that our souls be 
saved!  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. Without the reading 
of a Kathisma. The 7th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 8th at the 
Sixth Hour, the 9th at the Ninth Hour.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone III: 
Our iniquities have risen up against us, * but do Thou, O Lord, rise up and 
help us: * for Thou art our Father, ** and we know none other besides Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Even Thine altars, O Lord of Hosts, * my King and my 
God. 
Verse: How beloved are Thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (37: 33 - 38:6) 
Thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into 
this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a 
bank against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall 
not come into this city, saith the Lord. For I will defend this city to save it for 
mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake. Then the angel of the Lord 
went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore 
and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were 
all dead corpses. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and 
returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in 
the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote 
him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and 
Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead. In those days was Hezekiah sick unto 
death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto 
him, Thus saith the Lord, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not 
live. Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, 
And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before 
thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy 
sight. And Hezekiah wept sore. Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, 
saying, Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy 
father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy 
days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the 
king of Assyria: and I will defend this city. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VIII: 
Prokeimenon: Show us, O Lord, Thy mercy, * and Thy salvation do 
Thou give unto us. 
Verse: Thou hast been gracious, O Lord, unto Thy land; Thou hast 
turned back the captivity of Jacob. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
MONDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, two by Joseph, in Tone III: 
Thou hast given us the time of the Fast, * to turn to Thee again and live, * 
and in no way perish, O Word of God. * Grant us all to worthily please Thee, * 
and serve Thee with warm compunction, O Christ, * like the honorable and 
wise harlot: * who for the sake of the sweet-smelling ointment * and the warm 
tears she shed before Thee, ** received forgiveness of sins.  
Like the blind man, from my heart I call upon Thee: * O Son of God, 
enlighten the eyes of my heart. * Like the faithful Woman of Canaan, I cry unto 
Thee: * Have mercy on me, O compassionate One, * for my soul is deceived by 
pleasures; * do Thou free it from the darkness of the passions * and grant me to 
live the remainder of my life in purity, ** that I may glorify Thine abundant and 
compassionate goodness. 
One by Theodore, in Tone VIII:  
The divinely-radiant grace of abstinence, * shineth forth upon us this day 
more brightly than the sun; * illumining our souls, it driveth away the clouds of 
sinful passions. * Embracing it heartily, let us complete the holy fast rejoicing; * 
and filled with gladness let us cry unto Christ: ** Sanctify, O Good One, those 
who faithfully complete it. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion; 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Guide me, O Lord, in Thy Way: and I Will walk in Thy 
truth. 
Verse: Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto me. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (13:12 - 18) 
Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the 
plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom. But the men of Sodom were wicked 
and sinners before the Lord exceedingly. And the Lord said unto Abram, after 
that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the 
place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: 
For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number 
the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered. Arise, walk through 
the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee. 
Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, 
which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord loveth the gates of Zion * more than all the 
dwellings of Jacob. 
Verse: His foundations are upon the holy mountains. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (14:27 - 15:4) 
The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. 
In the multitude of people is the king’s honor: but in the want of people is the 
destruction of the prince. He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but 
he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly. A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but 
envy the rottenness of the bones. He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his 
Maker: but he that honoreth him hath mercy on the poor. The wicked is driven 
away in his wickedness: but the righteous hath hope in his death. Wisdom 
resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but that which is in the 
midst of fools is made known. Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a 
reproach to any people. The king’s favor is toward a wise servant: but his wrath 
is against him that causeth shame. A soft answer turneth away wrath: but 
grievous words stir up anger. The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: 
but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness. The eyes of the Lord are in 
every place, beholding the evil and the good. A wholesome tongue is a tree of 
life: but perverseness therein is a breach in the spirit. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VII: 
Like the man who fell among thieves and was wounded, * I too have fallen 
due to my sins, * and my soul hath been grievously wounded. * To whom then 
shall I flee for healing, * if not but to Thee, O Physician of souls and bodies? ** 
O God pour out upon me Thy great mercy. 
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Tone IV: From the seed of original sin we have all sinned, * bereft of the 
joys and sweetness of Paradise * we have been led to a shameful life. * In place 
of a life of holiness and virtue, * we are sunk in the mire of sin, as though fallen 
among thieves, * as if almost dead, having strayed from Thy salvific teachings. * 
Yet we beseech Thee who hast appeared from Mary, * who with the Master’s 
dispassion hast shared in our passions: * bind up the wounds that come from 
sin, * and pour upon us Thy healing care ** O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast accepted the patient suffering of the holy martyrs: * accept our 
hymns of praise, O Lover of mankind, * and by their intercessions ** grant us 
Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone IV:  
Preserve thou thy servants from all misfortunes, * O blessed Theotokos, * 
that we all may glorify thee, ** the hope of our souls.  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Lord have mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Holy God, Holy Mighty ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ...,  
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
Reader: O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible 
Kingdom, and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a 
sinner; make steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine 
every defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: 
One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore (Thrice). Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
PSALM 33 (read or sung) 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
