--- PAGE 1 ---
THURSDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
THE GREAT CANON - AT MATINS  
(CHANTED ON WEDNESDAY EVENING) 
On Wednesday evening, about the fourth hour of the night, the usual 
beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in place of 
“God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 8th Kathisma, and 
then the Sessional Hymns to the Apostles in the Tone of the week (from 
the Oktoechos). Next we read the first part of the Life: of St. Mary of 
Egypt, written by St. Sophronius, Patriarch of Jerusalem. Psalm 50 is 
read, and then, after the litany: “O Lord, save Thy People ...,” we begin 
to sing the Great canon, slowly and with compunction. Before each 
Troparion of the Canon we make the Sign of the Cross, bow, and we 
chant: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Then followeth the Great Canon of Saint Andrew of Crete. The Irmoi of 
the Great Canon are sung twice. 
The Great Canon by St. Andrew of Crete;  
ODE I in Tone VI: 
Irmos: A helper and a protector * hath become unto me salvation. * My 
God, whom I will glorify, * the God of my fathers, * and I will exalt Him 
* for gloriously hath He been glorified.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
How shall I begin to mourn the deeds of my wretched life? What can I offer 
as first-fruits of lamentation? In thy compassion, O Christ, grant me remission 
of sins. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Come, O my wretched soul, and with thy flesh confess thy sins to the 
creator of all. From this moment forsake thy former brutishness and offer to 
God tears of repentance. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
My transgressions rival those of Adam the first formed man, and because of 
my sins I find myself stripped naked of God and of his everlasting kingdom of 
joy. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Woe to thee, my miserable soul, how thou art like the first Eve. Thou hast 
looked upon wickedness and wast grievously wounded by it; thou hast touched 
the tree and heedlessly tasted of its deceiving fruit. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Instead of the visible Eve, I have within my mind an “Eve” of passionate 
thought in my flesh, revealing to me that which seems sweet, but when I taste 
thereof I find it bitter. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
For failing to observe just one of Thy commandments, O Savior, Adam was 
justly banished from Eden. What then shall I suffer? For I continually reject thy 
words of life? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
By mine own free choice have I incurred the guilt of Cain’s murder. I have 
killed my conscience, bringing the flesh to life and making war upon the soul by 
my wicked actions. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Jesus, I have not been like Abel in His righteousness. I have never offered 
Thee acceptable gifts or godly actions, a pure sacrifice, or an unblemished life.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O wretched soul, Like Cain, we have also offered to the Creator of all, 
defiled actions, a polluted sacrifice and a worthless life: wherefore we also are 
condemned. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast fashioned me, O my Maker and Redeemer and Judge, as one who 
moulds clay, giving me flesh and bones, breath and life. But do Thou accept me 
in repentance. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
O Savior, I confess to Thee, the sins I have committed, the wounds of my 
soul and body, which murderous thoughts, like thieves, have inflicted upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Though I have sinned, O Savior, yet I know that Thou lovest mankind. 
Thou dost chastise with mercy and art fervently compassionate. Thou dost see 
me weeping and dost hasten to meet me, like the Father calling back the 
Prodigal Son. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As an outcast I lie before Thy gate, O Savior. In my old age cast me not 
down empty into Hades; but, before the end cometh, as the Lover of mankind, 
grant me remission of sins.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am like the man who fell among thieves - my own thoughts - and they, 
having covered my entire body with wounds, have left me beaten and bruised. 
But do Thou come to me, O Christ my Savior, and heal me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Priest saw me first, but passed by on the other side; the Levite looked 
on me in my distress but despised my nakedness. O Jesus, sprung from Mary, 
do Thou come to me and take pity on me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of all, take from me the heavy 
yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me tears of compunction 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
It is the time for repentance, wherefore I come to Thee, my Creator. Take 
from me the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me 
tears of compunction.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Reject me not, O Savior, cast me not away from Thy presence, take from 
me the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me 
remission of sins. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
All mine offences, voluntary and involuntary, manifest and hidden, known 
and unknown, forgive them all, O Savior, and since Thou art God, cleanse and 
save me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
O Savior, from my youth I have rejected Thy commandments, and ruled by 
the passions, I have passed my whole life in slothfulness. Wherefore I cry to 
Thee, O Savior, even now at the end: do Thou Save me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have wasted the substance of my soul in prodigal living, O Savior, and am 
left bereft of the fruit of virtues, and in hunger I cry out: O merciful Father, 
come out quickly to meet me and have compassion upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I fall down before Thee O Jesus: I have sinned against Thee, be merciful to 
me. Take from me the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, 
grant me tears of compunction.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Enter not into judgment with me, setting before me things I have done, 
examining my words, and correcting my disordered impulses. But according to 
Thine abundant compassion, overlook my wickedness, and save me O Almighty 
One. 
Another Canon to St. Mary of Egypt, same Tone and Irmos: 
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Grant me the radiant light of grace, from God’s noetic providence, that I 
may flee from the darkness of the passions and sing fervently the spiritually 
beautiful tale of thy life, O Mary. 
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Bowing before the divine laws of Christ, thou didst draw near to Him, and 
having forsaken the unbridled lust of sensual pleasure; in the fear of God thou 
didst attain unto all the God-pleasing virtues as if one.  
Refrain: Venerable Father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
By thine intercessions, O Andrew, deliver us from shameful passions and, 
show us to be partakers of the Kingdom of Christ; for with faith and love we 
sing thy praises O glorious one. 
Glory ..., O Trinity beyond all essence and worshiped in unity, take from me 
the heavy yoke of sin, and since Thou art compassionate, grant me tears of 
compunction. 
 Both now ..., O Theotokos, thou hope and protection of those who sing 
unto Thee, take from me the heavy yoke of sin and O Lady, as one pure, accept 
me in penitence. 
ODE II 
Irmos: Attend O heaven and I shall speak, * and sing in praise of Christ, 
* who from the virgin took flesh and came to dwell among us. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Attend, O heaven, and I shall speak. Give ear O earth, to the voice of one 
who repenteth before God, singing his praises. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Attend unto me O God my Savior, with Thine all-merciful eye, and accept 
my fervent tears of confession. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
More than all mankind have I sinned; I alone have sinned against Thee. But 
do Thou have compassion, since Thou art God, O Savior, on me Thy creature. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The storm of sin surgeth about me, O compassionate Lord, as Thou didst 
once stretch out Thy hand to save Peter, so now reach out to me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I offer unto Thee O Compassionate One, the tears of the harlot, do Thou 
cleanse me O Savior according to Thy loving-kindness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have darkened the beauty of my soul with the lust of passions, and wholly 
corrupted every aspect of my mind. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Having rent asunder the garment which my creator hath fashioned for me 
in the beginning, I now lie naked. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Having clothed myself in the garment which the serpent hath woven for 
me, I am ashamed. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The beauty of the tree, which I looked upon in the midst of the garden, hath 
deceived me, and I lie naked and ashamed. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The ruling passions have ploughed deep upon my back; making long 
furrows of their wickedness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have lost the beauty and innate glory with which I was first created, and I 
lay naked and ashamed. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Sin hath stripped me of the robe that God once wove for me, and it hath 
sewn for me garments of skin.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am clothed with the raiment of shame as with the leaves of the fig tree, in 
condemnation of my self-willed passions. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am clad in a defiled garment, shamefully bloodstained by the flow of a 
passionate and self-indulgent life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have fallen under the burden of passions and the corruption of material 
things; and the enemy vexeth me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have lived a life of love for material things, lacking in abstinence, instead 
of one free from possessions, O Savior, and now I wear a heavy yoke. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have adorned the image of my flesh with a many-colored coat of shameful 
thoughts, wherefore I am condemned.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Having cared only for outward adornment, I have neglected that which is 
within; the tabernacle fashioned in God’s image.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have formed within myself the disfigurement of the passions, and through 
my strivings for lustful pleasure, I have destroyed the beauty of the mind. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have buried with the passions the first beauty of the image, O Savior. But 
seek me, as once Thou didst seek the lost coin, and find me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like the Harlot I cry to Thee: I have sinned, I alone have sinned against 
Thee. Do Thou accept my tears as sweet myrrh, O Savior. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like David I have fallen in lust, and defiled myself: but wash me clean O 
Savior, with my tears. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Like the Publican I cry to Thee: Be merciful, O Savior, be merciful to me. 
For no child of Adam hath ever sinned against Thee as I have sinned. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have no tears, I have no repentance, nor compunction: But do Thou 
Thyself grant me these, as Thou art God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Lord, O lord, shut not Thy door against me at that time, but open it unto 
me, for I repent before Thee. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Lover of mankind Thou desirest to save all mankind, do Thou call me, 
and accept me as one who repents, since Thou art good. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Give ear to the sighing of my soul, and accept the tears that fall from mine 
eyes O Savior, and save me. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos, save us.  
O Theotokos undefiled, all-praised Virgin, intercede fervently that we may 
be saved.  
Another Canon 
Irmos: Behold now, and see * that I am God, * Who by My right hand 
and by My power alone * rained down manna in the days of old, * and 
made springs of water * flow from the barren rock, * for My people in the 
wilderness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
“Behold now, and see that I am God”: hearken, my soul, to the Lord as he 
crieth to thee; forsake thy former sin, and do thou, as one unclean, fear Him as 
thy Judge and God.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
To whom shall I liken thee, O greatly sinful soul? Only to the firstborn Cain 
and Lamech. For thou hast stoned thy body with thy wicked deeds, and killed 
thy mind with thine unspeakable desires. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Call to remembrance all those who lived before the Law, O my soul, for 
thou hast not emulated Seth, nor followed Enos, nor Enoch, who was 
translated to heaven, nor Noah; rather, thou art destitute of the life of the 
righteous. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou alone, O my soul, hast opened the floodgates of the wrath of thy 
God, and flooded, as once was the earth, all thy flesh and deeds and life; and 
thus remained outside the Ark of salvation. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
“I have slain a man to my grief and wounding, and a young man to my 
detriment” cried Lamech lamenting; dost thou not tremble O my soul, for thou 
hast defiled thy flesh and polluted thy mind?  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O how I have emulated Lamech, the murderer, slaying my soul as it were a 
man, and my mind as it were a young man, and as Cain the murderer killed his 
brother, so have I killed my body with sensual desires. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Skillfully didst thou plan to build a tower, O my soul, and establish a 
stronghold for thy wanton lusts; had the Creator not confounded thy designs 
and dashed thy crafty plans to the ground. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have been assaulted and wounded; behold, the arrows of the enemy which 
have pierced my soul and body; behold the lesions, the sores and injuries, which 
cry to God on behalf of the wounds of my freely-chosen passions.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Lord once rained down fire from heaven and burnt up those who dwelt 
in Sodom, roused to anger by their transgressions. And thou, O my soul, hast 
been kindled within the fire of Gehenna, and there shalt thou burn. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Know and behold, that I am God, who searcheth out the heart of all 
mankind, punishing their thoughts, reproving their deeds, and burning up their 
sins, and protecting the orphan, the humble and the pauper. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst lift up thine hands to the compassionate God O Mary, having 
sunk into the abyss of sin, and, as once He did to Peter, so also in His love for 
mankind, He stretched forth His hand to help thee, in every way seeking thy 
conversion. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 9 ---
With all eagerness and love didst thou run to Christ, turning from thy 
former path of sin, finding thy food in the trackless desert, and fulfilling in 
purity the divine commandments.  
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
Let us see, let us see, O soul, the love for mankind of our God and Master, 
and before our end, let us fall down before Him, and cry with tears; By the 
prayers of the Holy Hierach Andrew, O Savior, have mercy on us. 
Glory ..., Trinity uncreated and without beginning, O undivided Unity: 
accept me in repentance and save me, a sinner. I am Thy creation, reject me 
not; but spare me and deliver me from the fire of condemnation.  
 Both now ..., O most pure Lady, Birthgiver of God, the hope of those who 
flee to thee and the haven of the storm-tossed: pray to the merciful God, thy 
Creator and thy Son, that He may grant His mercy even to me. 
ODE III 
Irmos: Establish my thoughts, * O Christ, * on the unshakeable rock of 
thy commandments. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Lord once caused fire to rain down from God, O my soul, and burned 
up the land of Sodom. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Upon the mountain shalt thou find salvation, O my soul!, as did Lot who 
took refuge in Zoar before it was too late. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Flee from the flames, O my soul! Flee from the burning heat of Sodom! 
Flee the destruction of the divine flame! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I confess to Thee, O Savior, that I have sinned, I have sinned against Thee 
without measure, but since Thou art compassionate and good, do Thou absolve 
and forgive me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I alone have sinned against Thee More than all mankind; O Christ Savior 
forsake me not! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As Thou art the good shepherd, seek me Thy lamb which hath gone astray, 
and forget me not. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou art my sweet Jesus, Thou art my creator, in Thee shall I be justified O 
my Savior. 
Refrain: O Holy Trinity, our God, glory be to Thee. 
O God, Trinity in unity, save us from delusion, temptations and misfortune! 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Rejoice, O womb which received God! Rejoice, O throne of 
the Lord! Rejoice, O mother of our life! 
Another Canon 
Irmos: O Lord, upon the rock * of Thy commandments * make firm my 
heart, * for Thou alone art Holy and Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Unto me art Thou the Fountain of life, and the Destroyer of death; and 
before the end I cry unto Thee from my heart: I have sinned, do Thou cleanse 
and save me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have followed the example, O Savior, of those who, in the days of Noah, 
lived in debaucheries; and like them I am condemned to drown in the Flood. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned against Thee, do Thou cleanse me. For 
there is none among mankind who have sinned, whom I have not surpassed in 
transgressions.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou, O my soul, hast followed after Ham, who mocked his father. Thou 
hast not covered thy neighbor’s shame, by walking away with turned face. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast not inherited the blessing of Shem, O wretched soul, nor hast 
thou received, like Japhet, a place in the land of forgiveness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Depart from the land of Haran, O my soul, depart from sin, and come to 
the land that Abraham inherited, which floweth with incorruption and eternal 
life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, how in days of old, Abraham left his 
fatherland and became a wanderer: emulate him in his choice. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
At the oak of Mamre the Patriarch was hospitable to the angels, and he 
inherited the reward of the promise in his old age. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my wretched soul, thou knowest how Isaac was mystically offered as a 
new whole burnt offering to the Lord: emulate him in his choice. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard O my soul, how Ishmael was driven out as the child of a 
bondwoman. Take heed and be watchful, lest the same thing happen to thee 
because of thy lustful heart. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast become like Hagar the Egyptian: thy free choice hath 
become enslaved, and thou hast borne a new Ishmael, stubbornness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou knowest, O my soul, how the ladder that was shown to Jacob, reached 
from earth to heaven. Why hast thou not provided a firm foundation for such a 
passage through piety? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The priest of God, the king set apart, whose life was an image of Christ 
among men in the world, do thou emulate him. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Be not turned into a pillar of salt my soul, looking back: Fear the example of 
the people of Sodom, and find salvation in the mount of Zoar. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Flee, O my soul, like Lot from the burning of sin; flee from Sodom and 
Gomorrah; flee from the flame of every unspeakable desire. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Have mercy, O Lord, have mercy on me, I cry unto Thee, who comest with 
Thine angels to give to every man what is due for his deeds.  
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
I am held captive by the tempest and billows of sin: but do thou O Mother, 
ever keep me safe and lead me to the haven of divine repentance  
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
The supplication of a servant of God, O venerable mother, do thou offer to 
the compassionate Theotokos, and by thine intercessions open unto me the 
divine entranceway.  
Refrain: Venerable Father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
By thy prayers grant even unto me the forgiveness of trespasses, O Andrew, 
Hierarch of Crete, for thou art a seer of the mystery of repentance. 
Glory ..., O simple Unity praised in a Trinity of Hypostases, uncreated 
beginningless Essence, save us who in faith worship Thy power. 
 Both now ..., O Birthgiver of God, who without knowing a man hast given 
birth within time to a Son, who was begotten outside time from the Father; and, 
strange wonder! thou givest suck while remaining a Virgin.  
Sessional Hymns of the holy apostles, by Joseph; in Tone VIII: 
Divinely-effulgent lights, eyewitnesses of the Savior, * illumine us in the 
darkness of this life, * that we may walk honestly as in the day; * that with the 
light of abstinence we may drive far from us the passions of the night, ** and 
behold with joy the radiance of Christ’s Passion. 
Glory ..., by Theodore; in Tone VIII: 
O divinely chosen twelve apostles, * offer now unto Christ your 
supplications, * that we may all complete the course of the Fast, * completing 
our prayers with compunction * and eagerly practicing the virtues; * that we 
may behold the glorious Resurrection of Christ God, ** bringing unto Him 
praise and glory. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
The Son and Word of God whom nothing can contain, * in a manner 
beyond all telling and understanding * was born from thee, O Theotokos. * 
With the apostles do thou pray unto Him, * that He bestow true peace upon the 
Ecumene * and grant unto us before the end forgiveness of sins, * and in His 
extreme goodness ** deem thy servants worthy of the heavenly Kingdom. 
Note: The second part of the Life of St. Mary of Egypt is read, and then 
the we chant the following two three-canticled canons of the holy 
apostles beginning with the Irmos, these troparia are read without bows or 
prostrations. In Tone VIII: 
ODE IV 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Having lived in abstinence and been enlightened by Christ, the apostles, by 
their divine mediations, comfort us in this season of abstinence. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Liken to a twelve stringed instrument, the divine choir of the disciples sang 
a hymn of salvation, confounding the orchestration of evil. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
With the rain of the Spirit ye have watered all that is under the heavens, 
driving away the drought of polytheism, O all-blessed ones. 
Refrain: Most Holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Do thou humble and save me, for I have passed my life in 
high-minded arrogance, O all-pure Virgin, for thou didst bear the Lord who 
hath exalted our humbled nature. 
Another canon, by Theodore; in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: O Lord, I have heard the mystery of Thy dispensation; * I have 
considered Thy works, * and I have glorified Thy Divinity. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O all-honored choir of apostles, pray ye to the Maker of all, beseeching Him 
that He have mercy upon us who sing your praises. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Ye are Christ’s husbandmen, O apostles, and ye have tilled the whole world 
with the Word of God, bringing Him fruit at all times. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Ye became a vineyard, for Christ O most-beloved ones, for by you the 
world hath partaken of the wine of the Spirit. 
Glory ..., Trinity one in essence, beginningless and supreme in power, the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit: O God, Light and Life, protect Thy flock. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Rejoice!, fiery Throne! Rejoice!, Candlestick that 
beareth the Light! Rejoice!, Mountain of sanctification, Ark of life, Tabernacle 
and Holy of Holies 
Then followeth ODE IV of the Great Canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: The prophet heard * of Thy coming, O Lord, * and he was afraid. 
* How wast Thou to be born of a virgin * and appear unto mankind? * 
and he said * “I have heard report of Thee and I am afraid”; * glory to 
Thy power, O Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
O righteous judge despise not Thy works, nor turn away from Thy creation, 
but in Thy compassion do Thou forgive me, even though as a man I have 
sinned more than all, for as the Lord of all, it is within Thy power to remit sins. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The end draweth near, O my soul! The end draweth near, yet thou dost not 
care or make ready. Arise! The time is short! The judge already standeth at the 
door, like a dream the days of our life pass as quickly as a flower. Why dost 
thou trouble thyself in vanity? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Awake, O my soul, consider the evil things thou hast done. Set them before 
thine eyes and allow thy tears to flow. Then with boldness confess thy deeds 
and thoughts to Christ, and so be justified. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
There hath never been in life a sin, or deed, or wickedness that I have not 
committed, O Savior. I have sinned in my disposition, my thoughts, my words, 
and my deeds. There is none that hath sinned more than I. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
For this I the wretched one, am condemned in the tribunal of my 
conscience where the judgment is more compelling than that of any on earth. O 
my judge, Who didst redeem me, Thou knowest my heart, spare, deliver and 
save me, Thy servant. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The ladder which long ago the great patriarch Jacob saw, is an example O 
my soul, of approach through action and ascent through knowledge. If thou 
dost will to live aright in action, in knowledge, and in contemplation, renew thy 
life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The patriarch endured the burning heat of day, and the frost of night, 
enduring privation making daily gains of sheep and cattle, to gain his two wives. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
By the two wives, we understand action, and knowledge in contemplation 
Leah is action, for she bore many children, Rachel is knowledge for she endured 
great toil, for without toil O my soul, neither action, nor contemplation, will 
accomplish anything. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
O my soul, be watchful, be full of courage, like the great Patriarch, that thou 
mayest acquire action with knowledge, and be named Israel, “the mind that sees 
God”; and thus by contemplation reach the innermost darkness and gain great 
merchandise.”  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The great Patriarch begat the twelve Patriarchs as children, mystically 
establishing for thee, my soul, a ladder of ascent through action, for in his 
wisdom he set his children as steps, by which thou canst ascend upwards. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast emulated Esau the despised, O my soul, and given the birthright 
of thy first beauty to the deceiver; thereby losing thy father’s blessing, and in thy 
wretchedness thou hast been twice deceived, both in action and in knowledge. 
Wherefore repent now. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Esau was called Edom because of his raging love for women; burning 
always with unrestrained desire and stained with the smear of sensual pleasure, 
he was named “Edom”, which means the red-hot heat of a soul that loveth sin.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, of Job who was justified, but thou hast not 
imitated his fortitude. In all thine experiences, and trials, and temptations, thou 
hast not kept firmly to thy purpose but hast shown thyself to be inconstant. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
He formerly sat upon a throne, but now he sitteth upon a dung-hill, naked 
and covered with lesions. Once he was blessed with many children and admired 
by all, but suddenly he became childless, and homeless. Even so, he counted the 
dung-hill as a palace and his sores as pearls 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
A man of great wealth and righteousness, abounding in riches and livestock, 
clothed in royal dignity, in a crown and purple robe, Job was suddenly stripped 
of wealth, glory and kingship, and became a beggar. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
If he who was righteous and blameless above all mankind did not escape the 
snares and pits of the deceiver, what wilt thou do, wretched and sin-loving soul, 
when some sudden misfortune befalleth thee ? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
I have defiled my body, my spirit is stained, and I am covered all over with 
wounds: but do Thou O Christ, as the physician, heal both through repentance. 
Wash, purify and cleanse me, O my Savior, and show me to be whiter than 
snow.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thy Body, and Blood, O Word, didst Thou lay down at Thy Crucifixion on 
behalf of all: Thy Body to restore me, Thy Blood to cleanse me; and Thou hast 
offered up Thy spirit, O Christ, to bring me back to Thy Father. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth O compassionate 
One, that we might be saved. Thou wast willingly crucified upon the Tree; and 
Eden, closed till then, hath been opened. Things above and those below, 
creation and all peoples, have thereby been saved and worship Thee. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
May the Blood from Thy side be to me a cleansing fount, and may the water 
that floweth with it be a drink of forgiveness. May I be purified by both, 
anointed and refreshed, O Word, having as chrism and drink Thy words 
flowing with life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have been deprived of the bridal chamber, I have been deprived of the 
wedding and the supper; for want of oil my lamp hath gone out and while I 
slept the door to the bridal chamber hath been shut; the supper hath been 
eaten; and I have been bound hand and foot, and cast out. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Church hath been granted Thy life-giving side as a chalice from whence 
floweth unto us a twofold stream of forgiveness and knowledge, representing 
the two Covenants, the Old and the New, O our Savior. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The time of my life is short, and filled with illness and wickedness. But 
accept me in repentance and call me back to knowledge, that I not become the 
possession and food of the enemy; but do Thou, O Savior, have compassion 
upon me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Now I speak boastfully, with boldness of heart; but to no avail and in vain, 
may I not be condemned with the Pharisee, but rather grant me the humility of 
the Publican, O righteous Judge, who alone art compassionate, and number me 
with him.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I know, O compassionate One, that I have sinned and violated the vessel of 
my body. But accept me in repentance and call me back to knowledge. Let me 
not become the possession and food of the enemy; but do Thou, O Savior, 
have compassion upon me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have become mine own idol, utterly defiling my soul with the passions, O 
compassionate One. But accept me in repentance and call me back to 
knowledge. Let me not become the possession and food of the enemy; but do 
Thou, O Savior, have compassion upon me.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have not hearkened to Thy voice, I have not heeded Thy Scripture, O 
Giver of the Law. But accept me in repentance and call me back to knowledge. 
Let me not become the possession and food of the enemy; but do Thou, O 
Savior, have compassion upon me.  
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst live the life of a bodiless one while in the flesh, O venerable one, 
and wast bestowed great Grace from God. Do thou ever protect us who honor 
thee with faith, and we entreat thee; deliver us by thy prayers from every danger 
that besets us. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Having descended into an abyss of great iniquity, thou was not held captive 
therein: but with better thinking didst gloriously ascend the heights of virtue 
through action, and the angelic orders, O Mary, were amazed.  
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
O Andrew, glory of the fathers and of Crete, since thou standest before the 
most Holy Trinity, by thy prayers cease not to beseech Him, that we who call 
upon thee with love as our all-blessed divine intercessor, be delivered from 
torment. 
Glory ..., Undivided in Essence, uncommingled in Hypostasis, I confess 
Thee to be God: Triune Deity, co-enthroned and co-ruling; and to Thee I raise 
the great thrice-holy hymn that is sung on high. 
 Both now ..., Thou didst give birth and art yet a virgin, and in both thou 
didst remain by nature inviolate. He who is born maketh new the laws of 
nature, and the womb bringeth forth without travail. When God so willeth, the 
natural order is overcome: for He doeth whatsoever He willeth.  

--- PAGE 18 ---
ODE V 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray Thee, O 
Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * and teach 
me, O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
My whole life hath passed in the darkness of night, and hath shrouded me in 
a shadowy mist, but do Thou O Savior, make me now a son of the day. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Wretched as I am, I have followed the example of Reuben, and like him, 
devised a wicked and illegitimate plan against the most high God, defiling my 
bed as did he his father’s. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I confess to Thee O Christ king, I have sinned, for like Joseph’s brothers I 
have sold into slavery that which was chaste and pure. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The righteous soul was cast out by his brothers and sold into slavery, as an 
image of the Lord, whilst thou, O my soul, hast sold thyself to thine own 
wicked deeds. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O wretched one, imitate the righteous and chaste mind and blameless soul 
of Joseph, and defile not thyself in wantonness, led astray by thy disordered 
desires. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Once Joseph was cast into a pit, O Lord and Master, forming therein an 
image of Thy burial and resurrection. What offerings such as these shall I ever 
bring unto Thee? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, of the basket of Moses: how he was carried on 
the surging waves of the river as if in a tabernacle; and thus avoided the bitter 
execution of Pharaoh’s decree. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
If thou hast heard of the midwives who once killed in its infancy the manly 
action of chastity O wretched soul; then be like the great Moses, and be suckled 
on wisdom. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast not struck and killed the wretched mind, like Moses the great did 
to the Egyptian, O my soul. Tell me then, how canst thou go and dwell in the 
desert emptied of passions through repentance?  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Moses the great went to dwell in the desert, come and seek to emulate his 
way of life, O my soul, that thou mayest attain to the vision of God in the bush. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Picture before thyself, O my soul, the rod of Moses striking the sea and 
making firm the deep by the sign of the Divine Cross, by which thou canst also 
do great things. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Aaron offered to God a blameless and undefiled fire, but Hophni and 
Phinehas brought to Him, as hast thou O my soul, a strange fire and a defiled 
life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
My will is heavy, O Master, and my mind hath been engulfed, I have 
become like the cruel magicians of Pharaoh, Jannes and Jambres, in soul and 
body, but do Thou help me. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I the wretched one, have defiled my mind with filth, but I beseech Thee, O 
Master; wash me clean in the waters of my tears, and make the garment of my 
flesh white as snow.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
If I examine mine actions, O Savior, I see that I exceed all mankind in sin; 
for I fully understand what I have done, and was not sinning in ignorance.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Spare, O spare, Thy creature, O Lord, I have sinned, forgive me, for Thou 
alone art pure by nature, and none save Thee is without defilement.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
For my sake, Thou who art God was fashioned as I am, and in that form, 
hast manifest miracles, healed lepers, given strength to the paralyzed, and 
stopped the issue of blood when the woman, O Savior, touched the hem of Thy 
garment.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O wretched soul, emulate the woman with an issue of blood, hasten to grasp 
the garment of Christ; that thou mayest be healed of thine afflictions and hear 
Him say. “Thy faith hath saved thee, go in peace.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Imitate the woman who was bowed down to the ground, O my soul; come 
and fall down at the feet of Jesus, that He may make thee straight again; and 
thou shalt walk upright upon the paths of the Lord. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As Thou art a deep well, O Master; flow forth unto me water from Thy pure 
veins, that like the woman of Samaria I may drink thereof and thirst no more; 
for from Thee floweth the streams of life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
May my tears be to me like the pool of Siloam, O Master and Lord, that I 
also may cleanse the eyes of my heart, and with my mind behold Thee, the pre-
eternal Light. 
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
With an incomparable and exceedingly rich love, thou didst desire to 
venerate the Wood of the Cross, and wast deemed worthy to fulfill thy desire. 
Make me also worthy to attain the glory on high. 
Refrain: Venerable Mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Crossing the stream of the Jordan, thou didst find tranquil peace, having 
escaped the pleasures of the flesh; by thine intercessions do thou also deliver us 
from them, O venerable one. 
Refrain: Venerable Father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
Supremely chosen among Pastors, O most wise Andrew, I beseech thee 
with great love and fear, that by thy prayers I may be granted salvation and 
eternal life. 
Glory ..., We glorify Thee, O Trinity, one God, simple essence and unity, 
and we worship Thee ever singing, “Holy! Holy! Holy!” Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit. 
 Both now ..., O most pure Virgin Mother who knew not a man, God the 
creator of all things became incarnate through thee, uniting Himself to our 
human nature. 
 
 

--- PAGE 21 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: With my whole heart, I cried * unto the tenderly compassionate 
God, * and he heard me * from the lowest depths of Hades; * and raised 
up my life from corruption. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The tears and deepest sighings of my soul I sincerely offer unto Thee, O 
Savior, crying from the heart, “O God, I have sinned against Thee, do Thou 
cleanse me.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast become a stranger to thy Lord, O my soul, like Dathan and 
Abiram, but cry “spare me” from the lowest depths of Hades, that the Earth 
not open and swallow thee as once it did them. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Rampaging like a heifer, O my soul, thou hast become like Ephraim, as an 
agile Hart flee the hunter’s nets and save thy life, gaining wings with action, and 
contemplation. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Be assured O my soul, as God was able to cleanse the hands of Moses, he 
can also cleanse and whiten a leprous life. Therefore, despair not of thyself even 
though thou art indeed leprous. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The waves of my sins, O Savior, have returned and of a sudden engulfed 
me, as of old the waters of the Red Sea did the Egyptians and their charioteers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast made a foolish choice, O my soul, like Israel before thee; instead 
of manna from heaven, thou hast unreasonably shown a preference for the 
pleasure-loving gluttony of the passions.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The wells of Canaanitish thoughts, O my soul, hast thou prized more than 
the veined Rock from which floweth the river of Wisdom, like a chalice pouring 
forth streams of theology. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The meat of swine, the flesh-pots and foods of Egypt hast thou preferred, 
O my soul, to the manna from heaven, as did the ungrateful people of old in 
the desert wilderness. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
When Thy servant Moses struck the rock with his rod, he prefigured Thy 
life-giving side, O Savior, from whence we all draw the water of life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Search O my soul, like Joshua the son of Nun, and spy out the land of thine 
inheritance, and take up thy dwelling within it through the goodness of the law. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Rise up and make war, as did Joshua against Amalek, against the passions of 
the flesh, ever gaining the victory over the Gibeonites, thy deceitful thoughts. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Traverse the flowing waters of time, as did the Ark of old, and take 
possession of the promised land: for God thus commandeth thee, O my soul. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
As Thou didst save Peter who cried out, “save me”, do Thou come quickly, 
O Savior, before it is too late, and save me from the beast. Stretch out Thine 
hand and lead me up from the abyss of sin. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Lord, I know Thee as a tranquil haven; come quickly, O Lord Christ, and 
deliver me from the lowest depths of sin and despair.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I am like the coin, O Savior, marked with the likeness of the King, which of 
old Thou didst lose. But light Thy lamp, O Word, Thy Forerunner, and seek 
and find Thine image again. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst ceaselessly shed streams of tears, and with thy soul afire, quench 
the burning of the passions O Mary, grant also unto me thy servant, the grace 
of these thy tears.  
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou didst attain to heavenly passionlessness, through the perfection of thy 
life on earth, O Mother, wherefore we hymn thee, and beseech thee to intercede 
on our behalf, that we may be delivered from the passions. 
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
Knowing thee to be the shepherd and prelate of Crete and intercessor on 
behalf of the whole inhabited world, O Andrew, I hasten to thee and cry: 
“Deliver me, O father, from the depth of sin.”  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Glory ..., “I am the Trinity, simple and undivided in Essence yet divided in 
Hypostasis. I am the Unity one in essence,” sayeth the Father, the Son, and the 
divine Spirit. 
Both now ..., Thy womb, O Birthgiver of God, bore God who for our sakes 
was clothed in our likeness. Implore Him, the creator of all, that by thy prayers 
we may be found justified. 
Kontakion of the great canon, in Tone VI: 
O My soul, O my soul, * arise! why dost thou sleep? * The end draweth 
near, and thou shalt be confounded, * awake then and be watchful * that Christ 
thy God may spare thee, ** for He is everywhere present, and fillest all things. 
Ikos: Seeing that Christ’s spiritual infirmary hath been opened, and that 
healing floweth from it upon Adam, the devil became filled with anguish and as 
one stricken, lamented to his comrades crying: “What shall I do to the son of 
Miriam? The man from Bethlehem hath slain me, He who is everywhere 
present and fillest all things. 
Then the Beatitudes with the following Troparia, in Tone VI: 
Verse: In Thy Kingdom remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in 
Thy Kingdom. 
Thou didst make the Robber a citizen of Paradise on the Cross when he 
cried unto Thee, O Christ, “Remember me!” Deem me, unworthy as I am, also 
worthy of his repentance.  
Verse: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of 
Heaven. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, of Manoah of old who saw God in a vision 
and received from his barren wife the fruit of God’s promise? Let us imitate his 
piety.  
Verse: Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. 
Thou, O my soul, hast emulated Samson’s laziness; and shorn the head of 
thy good deeds, and by the love of pleasure, surrendered to the Philistines a 
chaste and blessed life.  
Verse: Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. 
He who previously conquered the Philistines with the jawbone of an ass, is 
now found to be a dissolute slave of passionate impulse. But flee, O my soul, 
his example, his deeds, and his weakness.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
Verse: Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for 
they shall be filled. 
Barak and Jephthah, the military leaders, with manly-minded Deborah, were 
raised to be Judges of Israel. Learn courage from their deeds, my soul, and 
strengthen thyself.  
Verse: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 
Thou knowest, O my soul, of Jael’s bravery, who impaled Sisera of old and 
wrought salvation with a sharp lance, by which the Cross is typified to thee.  
Verse: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 
Offer a sacrifice of praise, O my soul, offer action as a daughter purer than 
Jephthah’s, and slay thy carnal passions as a sacrifice to thy Lord.  
Verse: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of 
God.  
Consider, O my soul, Gideon’s fleece, receive the dew from Heaven; stoop 
down like a hart and drink of the water that floweth from the Law by the 
practice of study.  
Verse: Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for 
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Thou, O my soul, from lack of understanding hast drawn upon thyself the 
condemnation of the priest Eli, by allowing the passions to act sinfully within 
thee, as he allowed his children to commit transgressions.  
Verse: Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all 
manner of evil against you falsely for My sake. 
The Levite in the book of Judges, carelessly divided his wife among the 
twelve tribes, my soul, in order to make known the lawlessness of Benjamin.  
Verse: Rejoice and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in the 
Heavens. 
Chaste Hannah when praying moved her lips in praise, while her voice was 
not heard; but yet, though barren, she hath born a son worthy of her prayer.  
Verse: Remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. 
He who was reckoned among the Judges, Hannah’s child, the great Samuel, 
was brought up in Armathaea in the House of the Lord. Imitate him, O my 
soul, and before judging others, judge thine own actions.  
Verse: Remember us, O Master, when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
David was chosen to be king, and royally anointed with a horn of divine oil. 
Wherefore if thou, O my soul, desirest the Kingdom on high, anoint thyself 
with the oil of tears.  
Verse: Remember us, O Holy One, when Thou comest in Thy Kingdom. 
Have mercy on Thy creation, O merciful One; have compassion on the 
work of Thy hands, and spare all who have sinned, even me who above all have 
despised Thy commands.  
Verse: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit: 
To The Trinity: Beginningless both in begotteness and procession, the 
Father Who begetteth do I worship, the Son who is begotten do I glorify, and 
the Holy Spirit, who is co-effulgent with the Father and the Son, do I hymn.  
Verse: Both now and ever and unto the ages of ages, Amen. 
Theotokion: We worship thy childbirth surpassing nature, yet we do not 
divide the glory of the two natures of thy Child, O Mother of God. For He is 
confessed as one in Person, twofold in Nature.  
ODE VII 
Irmos: We have sinned, and we have transgressed, * and we have done 
evil before Thee. * We have not kept nor followed * Thy commandments, 
but reject us not utterly, * O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have sinned, I have offended, I have rejected Thy commandments. I have 
increased in my sins and added wounds to my sores. But as Thou art 
compassionate, be merciful to me, O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The secrets of my heart have I confessed to Thee, my judge. See my 
humility, see my distress, and attend unto my judgment now, and since Thou art 
compassionate, be merciful to me, O God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Saul lost his father’s donkeys and found himself suddenly proclaimed king. 
Watch, O my soul, lest unbeknownst to thyself thou desirest thine animal 
appetites rather than the kingdom of Christ. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
David the forefather of God, once doubly sinned, O my soul, pierced with 
the arrow of adultery, and with the lance, imprisoned by the anguish of murder. 
But thou art more anguished than he, through the desires of thy disordered self-
will. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
David, though once compounding his sins by adding murder to adultery, 
showed a twofold repentance of both. But thou, O my soul, hath done worse 
things than he, yet hath never repented of them before God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
David once showed us an image of repentance, writing in a psalm as if an 
Icon all that he had done and condemned it, crying “Be merciful to me for 
against Thee only have I sinned. O God of all, do Thou cleanse me.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Ark was being carried in a carriage, and when the ox stumbled, it was 
no more than touched, and invoked the wrath of God. O my soul, flee from 
such presumption and with reverence have respect for sacred things. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard of Absalom; how he rebelled against what is natural; thou 
knowest the unholy deeds by which he defiled his father David’s bed, 
nonetheless thou hast imitated him in his passionate and sensual-loving desires. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast made thy free dignity subject to the flesh; for having found in 
thine enemy another Ahitophel, O my soul, thou hast acquiesced to his 
counsels. But Christ Himself hath nullified them, and redeemed thee from all of 
them. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Solomon the wonderful, who was full of the grace of wisdom, once 
committed wickedness in the sight of God and turned away from Him. By thine 
accursed life O my soul, thou hast become like him. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Consumed by sensual passions, he defiled himself. The zealot of wisdom 
hath became a zealot of prodigal women and a stranger to God. Woe is me! O 
my soul, thou hast noetically imitated him, defiling thyself with polluted desires. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast imitated Rehoboam, who paid no attention to his father’s 
counselors, and Jeroboam, that evil servant and betrayer of old. O my soul, flee 
from their example and cry unto God: “I have sinned, have compassion upon 
me.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Woe is me, O my soul! Thou hast imitated Ahab in defilement. Thou hast 
become a dwelling-place of the pollutions of the flesh and a disgraceful vessel 
of the passions. But sighing from the depths of thy soul, tell thy sins to God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Of old Elijah twice destroyed with fire fifty of Jezebel’s servants, and slew 
the prophets of shame, as a rebuke to Ahab. But flee from the example of both 
of them, O my soul, and strengthen thyself. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Heaven is closed to thee, O my soul, and a famine from God hath seized 
thee, as when Ahab was not attentive to the words of Elijah the Tishbite. But 
be like the widow of Zarephat and feed the soul of the Prophet. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Consciously hast thou incurred the guilt of Manasseh, setting up the 
passions as an abomination and multiplying, O my soul, indignations. But do 
thou fervently emulate his repentance and acquire compunction 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I fall down before Thee, and bring to Thee my words as tears. I have sinned 
as never did the Harlot, and I have transgressed as no other man on earth. But 
have compassion upon Thy creature, O Master, and call me back. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have buried Thine image and broken Thy commandment. All my 
comeliness hath been destroyed O Savior, and my lamp hath been quenched by 
the passions, but have compassion upon me, as David once sang, and “restore 
to me Thy joy.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Turn back, repent, uncover thine hidden things, and tell God, before whom 
all things are known; “Thou alone knowest my secrets, O only Savior; “have 
mercy on me”, as David once sang, “according to Thy mercy.” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like a dream of one awakening my days have vanished; wherefore, like 
Hezekiah, I weep upon my bed, that years may be added to my life. But what 
Isaiah will come to help, O my soul, except the God of all? 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  

--- PAGE 28 ---
Raising thy lament to the most pure Mother of God, thou didst first drive 
away the fury of the passions which, of necessity, assailed thee, then didst thou 
put the enemy to shame. Do thou ever grant help to me thy suffering servant. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
To Him Whom thou hast loved, and Whom thou didst desire, and for 
whose sake thou didst wear out thy flesh, O venerable one, to Christ pray now 
on behalf of us thy servants, that He may be merciful to us all, and grant a 
peaceful life to those who with honor worship Him.  
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
By thy prayers O father, establish me on the rock of faith, encompassing me 
with the divine fear of God, and granting me repentance. O Andrew, I beseech 
thee, do thou deliver me from the snares of mine enemies who ever seek me. 
Glory ..., O simple and undivided Trinity, one in essence and nature, Light 
and Lights, one Holy and three Holies, God; is praised as the Trinity. Therefore 
sing praises to Him, O my soul, and glorify the Life and Lives, the God of all. 
 Both now ..., We praise thee, we bless thee and we venerate thee, O 
Birthgiver of God, for from the undivided Trinity hast thou brought forth the 
only Son of God, opening unto us the heavenly realms on earth. 
We then chant two three-canticled canons, in Tone VIII: 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The Beginningless King of glory, * before Whom tremble all the 
hosts of heaven, * ye priests hymn and ye peoples * supremely exalt 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Like coals of immaterial fire burn up my material passions and ever kindle 
within me a desire for divine love, O apostles. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us honor the well-tuned trumpets of the Word, which have caused the 
poorly-founded walls of the enemy to fall, and which have firmly established 
the bulwarks of divine knowledge. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
Smash to pieces the passionate idols of my soul, as ye didst smash to pieces 
the temples and pillars of the enemy, O apostles, ye sanctified temples of the 
Lord. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Thou didst contain Him Who by nature cannot be contained, 
O pure one, and didst hold Him Who upholdeth all things; thou didst suckle 
Him who sustaineth all creation, Christ the Giver of Life. 
Second canon, Same Irmos: 
Irmos: The Beginningless King of glory ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
With the Spirit as the leading architect, O apostles of Christ, ye have 
fashioned the whole Church, and within it ye bless Christ throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Sounding the trumpets of dogmatic teachings, the apostles have overthrown 
all the deceit of idolatry, supremely exalting Christ throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O good and noble company of apostles, ye who watch over the world and 
dwell in the heavens, deliver from danger those who ever sing your praises. 
Glory ..., O threefold Sun, most radiant divine Sovereignty, O Nature one in 
glory, one in enthronement: the Father all-creating, the Son and the Spirit of 
God, I praise Thee throughout the ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: As a throne honored and most high, O ye 
peoples let us ceaselessly praise in song the Mother of God, for she alone is 
both a Mother and a Virgin after childbirth.  
Then we continue with the Great Canon: 
Irmos: Him whom the hosts of heaven glorify, * and before whom 
tremble the Cherubim and Seraphim, * let every breath and all creation * 
praise, bless, and supremely exalt, * throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Savior, I have sinned! Have mercy, awaken my mind to turn back to 
Thee, have compassion and accept me in repentance as I cry, “Against Thee 
only have I sinned and done evil - have mercy on me!” 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
The charioteer Elijah, once charioted the chariot of virtues into the heavens, 
high above all earthly things. Reflect, O my soul, on his ascent. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Elisha first struck the river Jordan with Elijah’s mantle, and its flow was 
staunched on both sides. But thou, O my soul, hast no hope to share in such 
grace because of thy lack of abstinence? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Elisha, inherited the mantle of Elijah, and was given a double portion of 
Grace from the Lord. But thou, O my soul, hast no hope to share in such grace 
because of thy lack of abstinence? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Shunammite woman gladly entertained the righteous Prophet, but in 
thy house O my soul, thou hast not received stranger nor traveler, wherefore 
thou shalt find thyself cast from the bridal chamber, weeping. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The unclean thoughts of Gehazai dost thou ever imitate, O wretched soul, 
and in thine old age, cast from thee his love of money. Flee the fire of Hades, 
and retreat from thy wickedness. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast emulated Uzziah, O my soul, and hast twofold the leprosy he 
had: for thy thoughts are futile, and thy deeds unlawful. Leave what thou hast, 
and hasten to repentance. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast heard how those of Nineveh repented before God in 
sackcloth and ashes. Thou hast not imitated them, but rather art more wicked 
than all who have sinned before the Law, and after the Law.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Thou hast heard, O my soul, how Jeremiah cried lamenting for the city of 
Zion while in the muddy pit, seeking tears. Follow then, his life of lamentation 
and be saved. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Jonah fled to Tarshish, foreseeing the conversion of the men of Nineveh; 
for as a prophet he knew the loving-kindness of God, and was jealous that his 
prophecy should not be proved wrong. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my soul, thou hast heard how Daniel stopped the mouths of the wild 
beasts in the pit; and thou knowest how the Children with Azarias, by their faith 
quenched the flames of the fiery furnace. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
All the names of the Old Testament have I set before thee, O my soul, as 
examples. Emulate the God-loving deeds of the righteous and flee from the sins 
of the wicked.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O righteous Judge and Savior, have mercy on me and deliver me from the 
fire, and from the punishment that I rightly deserve at the judgment. Before the 
end, grant me remission of sins through virtue and repentance.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Like the Thief I cry to Thee. “Remember me”; like Peter I weep bitterly; like 
the Publican I cry aloud, “Forgive me, O Savior”; I weep as did the Harlot, do 
Thou accept my lamentation, as once Thou didst the entreaties of the woman 
of Canaan. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Heal, O Savior, the corruption of my humbled soul, for Thou alone art the 
Physician of souls, apply plaster and pour in oil and wine: the works of 
repentance, and compunction with tears. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The woman of Canaan do I imitate and cry to Thee, “Have mercy on me, O 
Son of David”, and like the woman with an issue of blood, I touch the hem of 
Thy garment, and I weep as did Martha and Mary for Lazarus. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O Savior, I pour out upon Thine head as precious oil, the alabaster box of 
my tears, and like the Harlot, I cry out to Thee, seeking Thy mercy: I bring my 
prayer to Thee and ask of Thee forgiveness.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
None hath sinned against Thee as I; yet accept even me, O compassionate 
and good Savior, for I repent in fear and cry with love: Against Thee only have 
I sinned; I have transgressed, have mercy on me O merciful one. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 32 ---
Spare, O Savior thy creature, and as a shepherd seeketh the lost sheep that 
hath gone astray, do Thou snatch me from the wolf and make me a nursling in 
the pasture of Thine own flock. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
When Thou the Judge sittest upon Thy throne, since Thou art 
compassionate, Thou wilt reveal Thy fearful glory, O Savior, what fear there 
shall be then! When the furnace burneth with fire, and all shrink back in fear 
before Thy Judgment-seat. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
The Mother of the never-setting Light illumined thee and delivered thee 
from the darkness of the passions. Since thou hast recourse to the grace of the 
Spirit, O Mary, enlighten those who praise thee in faith.  
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Upon beholding in thee a wonder truly strange and new, Zosimas was 
struck with amazement, O Mother. For he saw an angel in the body and filled 
with astonishment, he praiseth Christ throughout the ages.  
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us.  
As thou hast boldness before the Lord, O Andrew venerable praise of Crete, 
intercede, I implore thee, that by thy prayers I may find release from the chains 
of my sins, O teacher of repentance, and glory of the venerable saints. 
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
O beginningless Father, co-eternal Son, and gracious Comforter, the Spirit 
of righteousness, Begetter of the Word of God, Word of the eternal Father, 
Spirit living and creative, O Trinity in unity, have mercy on me. 
 Both now ..., As from purple silk, O undefiled virgin, the spiritual robe of 
Emmanuel was woven within thy womb. Wherefore we proclaim thee to be the 
Theotokos in truth. 
We continue with two three-canticled canons, in Tone VIII: 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Saved by thee, O pure Virgin, * we confess thee to be truly the 
Theotokos, * and together with the choirs of the bodiless hosts * thee do 
we magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Ye were revealed, O apostles, as fountains of salvific waters: bring 
refreshment to my soul which fainteth from the thirst of sin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
I swim in the abyss of destruction and have been engulfed by the waters: 
with Thy right hand, O Lord, save me as Thou didst save Peter. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Ye are the salt that giveth savor to the teachings of salvation: dry up the 
foulness of my mind and dispel the darkness of mine ignorance. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: Having brought forth our Joy O Lady, grant me tears that in 
the coming day of judgment I may know divine consolation. 
Second canon, in Tone VIII: 
Irmos: With all generations we magnify thee, * the Mediatress between 
heaven and the earth. * For in thee, O Virgin, * the fullness of the 
Divinity * came to dwell in the flesh. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
We magnify you in our hymns, O glorious company of apostles: for ye have 
been manifest as shining lights throughout the universe, driving far away 
deception. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
With the net of the holy Gospel, O blessed apostles, ye have caught the 
rational fish, ever bringing them as an offering to Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
In your prayerful offerings to God remember us, we entreat you, O apostles. 
That we may be delivered from all temptation, for with love we sing your 
praises. 
Glory ..., I sing Thy praises, Unity in three Hypostases, the Father, the Son 
and the Spirit, one God and consubstantial Trinity, equal in power and without 
beginning. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: With all generations we call thee blessed, O 
Child-bearer and Virgin, for thou hast borne our Joy the Lord and through thee 
we have been delivered from the curse. 
And the remaining Troparia of the Great Canon: 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
My mind is wounded, my body hath grown weak; and my spirit aileth within 
me. My speech hath lost its power. Life giveth way to death and the end 
draweth near. What then shalt thou do, O miserable soul, when the judge 
approacheth to examine thy deeds? 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
I have put before thee, O my soul, Moses’ account of the creation, and after 
that, examples from the Old Testament of both the righteous and the 
unrighteous. But of these thou hast imitated the latter rather than the former 
and thereby sinned against thy God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
To thee, the law is enfeebled, the gospel is of no effect, the scriptures 
neglected, and words of the prophets fade away. Thy wounds O my soul have 
multiplied and there is no physician to heal thee. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Therefore, O my soul, to lead thee to contrition I will bring thee examples 
from the New Testament. Imitate the righteous and shun the ways of sinners, 
that through prayer, fasting, chastity, and reverence thou mayest win back the 
mercy of Christ. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ became a man calling to repentance both thieves and harlots. Repent, 
therefore, O my soul, for the doors of the kingdom now standeth open and the 
Pharisees, Publicans and adulterers having changed their lives, enter in ahead of 
thee! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ became man, shared in my flesh and of his own free will endured 
everything that pertaineth to human nature, only without sin. Thereby setting 
before thee an example and image of his condescension. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ granted salvation to the Magi and summoned the shepherds; he 
revealed the multitude of infants to be martyrs, glorified the elder and the aged 
widow, but thou, O my soul, hast not imitated their lives and works, therefore, 
woe to thee when thou art judged! 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Lord fasted forty days in the wilderness, and hungered at the end thus 
revealing His human nature. Therefore, O my soul, be not dismayed if the 
enemy attacks thee, for it is only through prayer and fasting that he shall be 
driven away. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ was being tempted, tempted by the devil O my soul, who showed 
Him the stones that they might be made bread, and led Him up into a 
mountain, to see all the kingdoms of the world in an instant. O my soul, look 
with fear on what happened; watch and pray every hour to God 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The gentle Dove who loved the desert wilderness, the voice of one crying 
aloud, the Lamp of Christ, preached repentance; but Herod sinned with 
Herodias. O my soul, watch that thou be not trapped in the snares of the 
lawless ones, rather, embrace repentance 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Forerunner of Grace went to dwell in the desert wilderness, and Judaea 
and all Samaria hastened to hear him; they confessed their sins and were eagerly 
baptized. But thou, my soul, hast not imitated them.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Marriage is honorable, and the marriage-bed undefiled, for on both Christ 
hath given His blessing, eating in the flesh at the wedding in Cana, turning the 
water into wine, and revealing His first miracle, that thou, O my soul, may 
change thy life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Christ healed the paralyzed man, and he took up his bed; He raised from the 
dead the young man, the son of the widow, and the centurion’s child-servant; 
He appeared to the woman of Samaria and spoke to thee, O my soul, of 
worship in spirit. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Lord healed the woman with an issue of blood, through the touching of 
the hem of His garment; He cleansed lepers, and restored the blind and the 
lame to health; He cured the deaf and the dumb and the woman bowed to the 
ground by His word, that thou, O wretched soul, may be brought to salvation.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Healing infirmities, preaching good tidings to the poor, Christ the Word 
cured cripples, ate with publicans, and conversed with sinners. He brought back 
the departed soul of Jairus’ daughter with the touch of His hand. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Publican was saved, and the Harlot converted to a chaste life, but the 
Pharisee was condemned with his boasting. For the first cried out “be 
merciful”, and the second, “Have mercy on me”; but the third said boasting, “I 
thank Thee, O God”, and other words of madness. 

--- PAGE 36 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Zacchaeus was a publican, yet he was saved; but Simon the Pharisee went 
astray, whilst the Harlot received remission and release from Him who hath the 
power to forgive sins. Make haste, O my soul, to follow her example. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The Harlot, O my wretched soul, hast thou not emulated; she who took the 
alabaster box of ointment, and anointed with tears the feet of the Lord wiping 
them with her hair, whereupon He shred the record of her previous sins. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
The cities in which Christ preached the Gospel, O my soul, were cursed, as 
thou dost well know. Fear their example, lest it be the same with thee. For the 
Master likened them to Sodom and condemned them to Hades. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Be not overwhelmed by despair, O my soul; for thou hast heard of the faith 
of the woman of Canaan, by it her daughter was healed by the Word of God. 
Do thou cry out from the depth of thy soul “save me also, O Son of David”, as 
she cried to Christ. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Have mercy on me and save me O Son of David, Thou who with Thy word 
didst heal the possessed. Let me hear Thy compassionate voice speak unto me 
as to the thief: “Verily, I say unto thee thou shalt be with Me in Paradise, when 
I come in My glory. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
One thief accused Thee, the other thief confessed Thy Divinity: for both 
were hanging beside Thee on the Cross. Open to me also, O compassionate 
One, the door of Thy glorious Kingdom, as once it was opened to the thief 
who with faith confessed Thee to be God. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Creation shuddered, upon seeing Thee crucified. Mountains and rocks were 
split from fear, the earth quaked, and Hades was despoiled; the light of day 
grew dark, at beholding Thee, O Jesus, nailed to the Cross. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
Demand not from me fruits worthy of repentance, for my strength hath 
failed within me. Grant me an ever-contrite heart and poverty of spirit, that I 
may offer these unto Thee as an acceptable sacrifice, O only Savior. 

--- PAGE 37 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me. 
O my Judge, who well knowest me, when Thou comest again with the 
angels to judge the whole world, look upon me then with Thy merciful eye and 
spare me, and have compassion upon me, O Jesus, for I have sinned beyond 
that of any other. 
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Thou hast struck all with wonder, by thy strange and wonderful way of life, 
both the ranks of angels and the race of mankind; for having surpassed nature 
thou didst live as though immaterial, traversing the Jordan with thy feet like that 
of a bodiless angel, O Mary.  
Refrain: Venerable mother Mary, pray to God for us.  
Call down the gracious mercy of the Creator upon us who sing thy praises, 
O venerable Mother, that we may be delivered from the sufferings and 
afflictions that beset us; that without ceasing, we may magnify the Lord who 
hath glorified thee.  
Refrain: Venerable father Andrew, pray to God for us. 
O venerable Andrew, thrice-blessed father and pastor of Crete, ceaselessly 
offer prayer on behalf of those who sing thy praises, that all who faithfully 
honor thy memory may be delivered from danger, distress, and from corruption 
and sin. 
Glory ..., Let us glorify the Father, let us exalt the Son, and with faith let us 
worship the Holy Spirit of God, the indivisible Trinity and Unity in essence, Let 
us worship Light and Lights, the Life and Lives Who granteth light and life unto 
the ends of the Earth. 
Both now ..., Watch over thy City O most pure Birthgiver of God, for 
through Thee she reigneth in faith, and by thee she is strengthened, and by thee 
she is victorious, overcoming every temptation, despoiling the enemy, and 
ruling her faithful subjects. 
Katavasia: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., Both now 
..., the Theotokion. 
 

--- PAGE 38 ---
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
O my soul, thou hast fallen into the ambushes of thieves, * and art 
grievously wounded, * by thine own sins hast thou been delivered into the 
hands of enemies * for no reason. * But while there is still time, * cry out with 
compunction: * O hope of the hopeless, life of the despairing, ** raise me up, 
O Savior, and save me  
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: O my soul, thou hast fallen into the ambushes ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Putting on the breastplate of the Faith * and armed with the Sign of the 
Cross, * ye showed yourselves to be courageous fighters. * Bravely did ye resist 
the tyrants * and cast down the delusions of the devil; * and ye were rewarded 
with a crown of victory; * ever intercede on our behalf, ** that our souls be 
saved. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O all-pure Virgin Theotokos, * accept the supplications of us thy servants, * 
and pray without ceasing that we may be granted ** peace and the remission of 
our sins. 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 

--- PAGE 39 ---
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim (Once only): 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately beginneth the first hour. Without the 
reading of a Kathisma. The 9th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 
10th at the Sixth Hour, and the 11th at the Ninth Hour.  
Note: At all the Hours the Lenten verses are not chanted, but read, and 
are accompanied by bows, not prostrations. After the Trisagion, at all the 
Hours We read the Kontakion from the Great Canon:  
Kontakion of the great canon, in Tone VI: 
O My soul, O my soul, * arise! Why dost thou sleep? * The end draweth 
near, and thou shalt be confounded, * awake then and be watchful * that Christ 
thy God may spare thee, ** for He is everywhere present, and fillest all things. 
Note: At the Hours, the Prayer of St. Ephraim is said once only, with 
three prostrations. At the Typika, the Beatitudes are not chanted but 
read, without prostrations.  
 

--- PAGE 40 ---
FIFTH WEEK OF LENT, THURSDAY 
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone VI: 
O compassionate, * longsuffering, almighty Lord, ** send down Thy mercy 
upon Thy people. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: The Lord is King, * let the earth rejoice. 
Verse: Let the many islands be glad. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (42: 5-16) 
Thus saith God the Lord, he that created the heavens, and stretched them 
out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that 
giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein: I the 
Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep 
thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; To 
open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that 
sit in darkness out of the prison house. I am the Lord: that is my name: and my 
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. Behold, the 
former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring 
forth I tell you of them. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the 
end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and 
the inhabitants thereof. Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their 
voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, 
let them shout from the top of the mountains. Let them give glory unto the 
Lord, and declare his praise in the islands. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty 
man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall 
prevail against his enemies. I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, 
and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and 
devour at once. I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their 
herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools. And I will 
bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they 
have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things 
straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: O sing unto the Lord a new song, for the Lord hath 
wrought wondrous things: * His right hand hath wrought salvation. 
Verse: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord, all the earth, sing and rejoice 
and chant psalms. 

--- PAGE 41 ---
FIFTH WEEK OF LENT, THURSDAY 
AT VESPERS  
After the Psalm of Introduction (Psalm 103) and the great Litany, we 
read the 12th Kathisma. 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 
6 Stichera from the Triodion, by Joseph, in Tone VIII: 
Of mine own free will, * I put off the beauty of the virtues through my first 
transgression, * but through Thy condescension, O Word of God, * I have 
been clothed with beauty once again. * For Thou hast not despised me * though 
I am defiled by grievous passions * and thieves have left me wounded on the 
road, * but by Thine almighty Power, * Thou hast kept me safe, granting me 
Thine aid, ** O abundantly merciful Lord. (Twice) 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: O martyrs of the Lord, * ye sanctify 
every place and heal every manner of illness: * and now we entreat you, ** to 
pray that our souls may be delivered from the snares of the enemy. 
In Tone I: Affixed, upon the Cross O Lord, * Thou hast torn up the record 
of Adam’s sin by the divine lance. * Shred then my bonds, O Word, * that I 
may offer with faith a sacrifice of praise to Thee: * for rejoicing I have now 
come to the goodly acceptable time of the Fast, ** which Thou hast appointed 
for the salvation of all. (Twice) 
Shining with the radiance of fasting, * Moses once beheld the glory of God. 
* Follow then his example, O my humble soul, * and with deeds of abstinence 
and prayer serve Him * who for thy sake stretched out His hands upon the 
Cross, ** that thou mayest partake of divine delight. 
One, by Theodore in Tone VI: 
We venerate Thy life-giving Cross, O Christ, * upon which in Thine 
ineffable and boundless goodness towards us, * Thou hast illumined Our souls, 
* wherefore we praise Thee without ceasing, * asking that we may complete the 
course of the Fast * with courage and joy; * and thereby attain, O Lord, ** to 
the glory of Thy Passion, by which Thou hast saved us. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion; 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: Exalt ye the Lord our God and worship the footstool of 
His feet: * for He is holy. 
Verse: The Lord is King, let the peoples rage. 

--- PAGE 42 ---
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (18: 20-33) 
The Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and 
because their sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see whether they 
have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if 
not, I will know. And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward 
Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the Lord. And Abraham drew near, and 
said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? Peradventure there 
be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place 
for the fifty righteous that are therein? That be far from thee to do after this 
manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be 
as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do 
right? And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then 
I will spare all the place for their sakes. And Abraham answered and said, 
Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust 
and ashes: Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou 
destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I 
will not destroy it. And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure 
there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty’s sake. 
And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: 
Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I 
find thirty there. And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto 
the Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will 
not destroy it for twenty’s sake. And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and 
I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he 
said, I will not destroy it for ten’s sake. And the Lord went his way, as soon as 
he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Shout with jubilation unto God, * all the earth. 
Verse: Serve the Lord with gladness, come before His presence with 
rejoicing. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS, (16:17-17:17) 
He that keepeth his way preserveth his soul. Pride goeth before destruction, 
and an haughty spirit before a fall. Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the 
lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud. He that handleth a matter wisely 
shall find good: and whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy is he. The wise in heart 
shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but the instruction of 
fools is folly. The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to 
his lips. Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to 
the bones. There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are 
the ways of death. He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth 
craveth it of him. An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a 
burning fire. A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief 
friends. A violent man enticeth his neighbor, and leadeth him into the way that 
is not good. He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips he 
bringeth evil to pass. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the 
way of righteousness. He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he 
that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city. The lot is cast into the lap; but 
the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. Better is a dry morsel, and quietness 
therewith, than an house full of sacrifices with strife. A wise servant shall have 
rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among 
the brethren. The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the Lord 
trieth the hearts. A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; and a liar giveth ear to 
a naughty tongue. Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: and he that 
is glad at calamities shall not be unpunished. Children’s children are the crown 
of old men; and the glory of children are their fathers. Excellent speech 
becometh not a fool: much less do lying lips a prince. A gift is as a precious 
stone in the eyes of him that hath it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth. He 
that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter 
separateth very friends. A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an 
hundred stripes into a fool. An evil man seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel 
messenger shall be sent against him. Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a 
man, rather than a fool in his folly. Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall 
not depart from his house. The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out 
water: therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with. He that 
justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are 
abomination to the Lord. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get 
wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it? A friend loveth at all times, and a brother 
is born for adversity. 
And the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts. 
 
Note: Oil and Wine are allowed in the refectory on account of the labors 
of the Vigil. If the Feast of the Annunciation falls on this day, the Service 

--- PAGE 44 ---
of the Great Canon is transferred from Thursday to Tuesday, and so we 
begin the Vigil on Monday evening. The Feast of the Annunciation is 
never transferred. 
 
 
 
