--- PAGE 1 ---
FRIDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS  
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 13th Kathisma, 
and then the Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the 
week. After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (14th Kathisma), the following 
Sessional Hymns. 
In Tone I: 
Thou hast stretched out Thine hands upon the Tree, O Christ, * by Thy 
wounds healing Adam’s wound. * Wherefore I pray Thee: * heal the Wounds, 
which the deceiver hath inflicted upon my soul, * and through prayer and 
fasting, O Savior, ** grant me to serve Thee. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., in Tone I:  
Stavrotheotokion: Beholding Thee stretched out dead upon the Cross, O 
Christ, Thine all-immaculate Mother cried aloud: “O my Son, Who with the 
Father and the Spirit, art beginningless, what is this ineffable dispensation, 
wherewith Thou hast saved the work of Thy most pure hands, O 
Compassionate One?”  
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (15th Kathisma), the following 
Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone VI: 
O Cross, thou guardian of the world * and exorcist of demons, * thee do we 
have as our invincible protection: * grant us to pass the remainder of the Fast * 
with a pure conscience, ** guiding our souls to Christ, O blessed Tree. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 
  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Both now ..., in Tone VI:  
Stavrotheotokion: O Pure and honored Virgin, * glory of the angels, * 
standing by the Cross of thy Son and God, * thou couldst not bear to hear the 
insults cast upon Him * by His enemies, * but didst cry aloud, with a mother’s 
anguish: * “O Lover of mankind, * how dost Thou endure their threatening? ** 
Glory be to Thy long-suffering.” 
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; for those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE V 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone I. 
Irmos: O Christ Who hast enlightened the ends ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain, O supremely good 
Jesus, hast stretched out Thine hands upon the Cross. Wherefore I pray Thee: 
have compassion upon me, for I too am stretched out and tempted by the 
enemy.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou hast awoken from Thy sleep upon the Cross O supremely good Jesus, 
and roused us to salvation, as we lay asleep in the bowels of destruction, 
wherefore we glorify Thee with faith. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Grant Thy noetic light to the hearts of Thy servants, O Savior, and grant us 
to behold the day of Thy Passion and Thy life-giving Resurrection, as we praise 
the power of Thy Kingdom. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Stavrotheotokion: Upon seeing Thee nailed to the Cross, the all-pure one 
was wounded in her soul and cried out in grief: “For the sake of mercy O Lord, 
Thou hast patiently endured Thy Passion, thereby granting freedom from the 
passions unto all.” 
Another canon, by Theodore, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Out of the night I seek Thee early ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
O Lover of mankind, Thou didst stretch out Thine arms, and wast nailed to 
the Cross, and Thy side was pierced with a spear by the Jews; Thou didst 
endure all these things, O Christ, that we may be saved.  
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Adam died of old by eating from a tree, but he found life again through the 
Tree of the Cross, O compassionate Lord, and partook once more of the food 
of Paradise. 
Glory ..., O Trinity, I praise Thee as a Unity in essence, beginningless, 
uncreated, supreme in sovereignty, a unity beyond perfection, God and Light 
and Life, Creator of the world. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: In thy childbearing transcending nature, the laws 
of nature are plainly annulled. For seedlessly hast thou given birth to God, 
begotten before all ages from the Father. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
I honor Thy Cross, the spear and the nails, O Master, for through them 
Thou hast delivered us from corruption, and by Thy Passion, rendered us 
immortal. 
Katavasia: Out of the night I seek Thee early, * enlighten me I pray 
Thee, O Lover of mankind, * and guide me in Thy commandments, * 
and teach me, O Savior, * to do Thy will. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone I. 
Irmos: The furnace moist with dew ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou didst blunt the sting of the evil one when Thou wast affixed upon the 
Cross with nails, O Savior. With a crown of thorns placed upon Thy head in 
mockery, Thou hast uprooted the thorns of mankind’s transgression, wherefore 
we sing Thy praises, and cry aloud: “Let all of creation bless the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou didst stretch out Thine arms upon the Cross, O Christ, gathering 
mankind to the knowledge of Thee; Suffering Thy side to be pierced by a lance 
Thou hast wrought a fountain of salvation for us who sing to Thee: “Let all of 
creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
With the streams of Thy compassionate goodness O Christ, cleanse Thou 
my heart, defiled by the wounds of sin, and grant me to bring forth the waters 
of contrition from within me, O Christ Jesus, that I may cry out to Thee: “Let 
all of creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Theotokion: We acknowledge thee to be like the sacred Vessel which held 
the manna of the Godhead, the Ark and Table, the Candlestick and Throne of 
God, the Canopy, and the Bridge that leads us to a divine life; wherefore we 
sing to Thee: “Let all of creation bless the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.” 
Second canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: With the hymn of the Children ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Christ hath been crucified and I have been restored to life; wherefore with 
the Children I sing: “O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
By Thy death upon the Cross the World hath been delivered from 
corruption, and with the Children it singeth: “O all ye works of the Lord, bless 
ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord 
Trinity equal in honor, consubstantial Unity, the Father, the Son and Spirit, 
save me, for with faith I hymn Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: I venerate Thine honorable childbirth O pure 
Theotokos, and with the Children I sing to Thee: “O all ye works of the Lord, 
bless ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
I praise Thy Cross by which I have been saved, O Savior, and with the 
Children I sing to Thee: “O all ye Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Verse: We praise, bless and Worship the Lord ..., 
Irmos: With the hymn of the Children I sing a song unto Christ: * O all 
ye Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, * and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone I. 
Irmos: The Bush, burning but not consumed ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Elijah beheld the Lord in a light and gentle breeze, and rendered his flesh 
lighter through prayer and fasting. Follow his example, O my soul, and cast 
aside the grossness of sensual delight, and thereby behold Him who is thy true 
desire. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Moses of old lifted an image of the serpent up upon a wooden staff, and 
thus prefigured Thine exaltation upon the Cross, O supremely good Savior. For 
through the Cross Thou hast delivered all nations that worship Thee from the 
wicked malice of the serpent. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I lay in a tomb of melancholy, my heart is hardened and weigheth heavily 
upon me. I understand not Thy living word and fear Thee not, O Savior. Do 
Thou have compassion and save me in Thy goodness, O greatly merciful One. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O Lady, thou art exalted above all things, show me to be raised 
high above wicked passions; for I glorify thee as the true Theotokos, and I 
hymn the praises of thine ineffable and honored childbearing, transcending 
understanding, O pure and divinely joyous One. 
Second canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
Thou hast been crucified and thereby saved me; Thou didst die and grant 
me life. O the depth of Thy love for mankind! Who hath ever seen or heard of 
a master who chooseth to die on behalf of his servants? But glory be to Thine 
ineffable goodness, O Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thy precious Cross O Lord. 
The sun set upon seeing Thee crucified: for how could it not but hide its 
light, beholding the indignation suffered by its Maker? Wherefore all creation 
was also shaken, and in silence cried to those who crucified Thee, that Thou art 
the God of all, Who hath suffered in the flesh. 
Glory ..., O Father, the only-Begetter of the only-Begotten Son; The only 
Light and Brightness from the one and only Light; and Thou, one and only 
Holy Spirit from the one God, Lord from Lord: O holy Three in One, save me 
as I theologize Thy divinity. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The wonder of thy childbearing doth fill me with 
awe, O all-immaculate one. How didst thou conceive seedlessly Him whom 
none can comprehend? Tell me! How didst thou remain a Virgin and also 
become a Mother? “Accept that which is above nature with faith, and worship 
the Child that is born; for whatsoever He willeth, He accomplisheth.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
For our sake each one of Thy members hath endured suffering: Thy head - 
blows, and Thy cheek - buffeting; Thy hands - the nails, and Thy side - the 
lance; and the agony of the Cross. But glory be to Thine ineffable loving-
kindness, O our Savior. 
Irmos: Ineffable is the birthgiving * of a seedless conception, * from a 
mother who knew not a man; * an undefiled childbearing. * For the birth 
of God hath renewed nature, * wherefore all generations rightly worship 
and magnify thee * as the Bride and Mother of God. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
With the thieves wast Thou nailed to the Cross O Christ God, * and by Thy 
wounds Thou hast healed the nature of man. * Turn not away from me who 
hath fallen among noetic robbers, * and bodiless thieves; * who have stripped 
me of the virtues and grievously wounded me. * There is none among the saints 
who can heal me; * I lay almost dead and with little life remaining in me. * My 
only hope is in Thee, who hath granted life to the dead: * Do Thou bind my 
wounds, and pour on me the oil of Thy goodness, ** O only Lover of mankind.  
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: With the thieves wast Thou nailed ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
What shall we call you, O ye saints? * Cherubim, for Christ rested upon you? 
* Seraphim, for ye glorify Him without ceasing? * Angels, for ye have 
renounced the flesh? * Powers, for ye perform miracles? * Manifold are your 
names, but greater are your gifts: ** pray ye that our souls be saved. 
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Stavrotheotokion: “O marvelous wonder! O Strange mystery and fearful 
deed!” * Cried the Virgin as she beheld in fear and trembling, * Thee, the child 
whom she had borne without travail, * hanging between two malefactors on the 
cross. * She cried aloud weeping: * “Woe is me, O my beloved child! How hast 
this wicked and ungrateful people ** nailed Thee to the Cross!” 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 

--- PAGE 8 ---
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately begineth the first hour. Without the reading 
of a Kathisma. The 19th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 20th at 
the Sixth Hour.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
FIFTH WEEK OF LENT, FRIDAY 
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone VIII: 
Thou art praised above all, O Christ our God, * who doth shake the earth, * 
that those who dwell therein may turn back and be saved; * making it firm once 
more * in Thy goodness and ineffable compassion. ** By the prayers of the 
Theotokos, have mercy upon us. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon of the prophecy, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Of mercy and judgment * will I sing unto Thee, O Lord. 
Verse: I will chant and have understanding in a blameless path. 
 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (45: 11-17) 
Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of 
things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands 
command ye me. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my 
hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded. I 
have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build 
my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord 
of hosts. Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of 
Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and 
they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, 
and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, 
saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God. Verily 
thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior. They shall be 
ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together 
that are makers of idols. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting 
salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord, hear my prayer, * and let my cry come unto Thee. 
Verse: Turn not away Thy face away from me in the day when I am 
afflicted. 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
FIFTH WEEK OF LENT, FRIDAY 
THE AKATHIST HYMN TO THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
AT VESPERS  
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, in Tone VI: 
As if from Jerusalem, * I have departed from Thy divine commandments, * 
and reached the Jericho of the passions, * led astray by the false glory of the 
cares of this life. * I have fallen among the thieves of my own thoughts, * who 
have stripped me of the robe of sonship and grace, * and now I lie wounded, 
and breathless. * The priest drew near, saw my body and paid no heed; * the 
Levite looked at it with loathing and passed by on the other side. * But Thou, O 
Lord who didst ineffably assume flesh from the Virgin, * hast willingly issued 
forth blood and water from Thy side, * and as with oil anointed me, O Christ 
God, * binding my wounds with fine linen, ** and joining me to the heavenly 
choirs, since Thou art compassionate. (Twice) 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VI: O martyrs of the Lord, * ye sanctify every 
place and heal every manner of illness: * and now we entreat you, ** pray that 
our souls be delivered from the snares of the enemy. 
And 7 Stichera of the Theotokos, in Tone VI: 
Revealing the pre-eternal counsel to thee O Maiden, * Gabriel appeared and 
stood before thee, greeting thee and saying: * “Rejoice, earth that hath not been 
sown; * Rejoice, burning bush that remaineth unconsumed; * Rejoice, depth 
incomprehensible; * Rejoice, bridge that leadeth to heaven * and ladder raised 
on high seen by Jacob; * Rejoice, divine vessel of manna; * Rejoice, destruction 
of the curse; * Rejoice, recalling of Adam, ** the Lord is with thee.” (Thrice) 
“Thou dost appear to me as a man”, * said the undefiled Maiden to the 
Archangel: * “how then dost thou speak to me of things surpassing men? * For 
thou hast said that God shall be with me, * and shall dwell in my womb; * and 
how pray tell, shall I become the habitation * and the sanctified palace of Him 
who doth ride upon the cherubim? * Beguile me not with deceit: * for I have 
not known the pleasure of a man, * I have not entered into wedlock. ** How 
then shall I bear a babe?” (Twice) 
 “When God so desireth, * the natural order is overthrown”, * said the 
bodiless angel, * “and things surpassing men come to pass. * Believe my words 
to be true, O all-holy all-immaculate one.” * And she cried aloud saying, * “Let 
it now be unto me according to thy word: * and I shall bear Him who is without 
flesh, * who shall assume flesh from me, * that He may lead man up, for He is 
all-powerful, ** unto his ancient glory, by the union of the natures.” (Twice) 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., by Theophanes in Tone II: 
The mystery that is from all ages * hath been revealed today. * The Son of 
God becometh the Son of Man, * that, sharing in what is worse, He may grant 
me to share in that which is better. * Of old Adam was deceived: seeking to 
become a God, but did not. * Now God becometh a man, that He may make 
Adam a god. * Let creation rejoice, let nature exult: * for the Archangel doth 
stand in fear before the Virgin, * and with his salutation “Rejoice!” he bringeth 
the joyful greeting * whereby our sorrows are assuaged. * O God, who in Thy 
merciful compassion became a man, ** glory be to Thee 
Then, “O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Compassionate and merciful is the Lord: * longsuffering, 
and plenteous in mercy. 
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His 
Holy Name. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (22:1-18) 
And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and 
said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am. And he said, Take now 
thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of 
Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains 
which I will tell thee of. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and 
saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and 
clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of 
which God had told him. Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and 
saw the place afar off. And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here 
with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to 
you. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac 
his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of 
them together. And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: 
and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but 
where is the lamb for a burnt offering? And Abraham said, My son, God will 
provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them 
together. And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham 
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and 
laid him on the altar upon the wood. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, 
and took the knife to slay his son. And the angel of the Lord called unto him 

--- PAGE 12 ---
out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And he 
said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for 
now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine 
only son from me. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold 
behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took 
the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son. And 
Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In 
the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. And the angel of the Lord called unto 
Abraham out of heaven the second time, And said, By myself have I sworn, 
saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy 
son, thine only son: That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will 
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the 
sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; And in thy seed 
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: How magnified are Thy works, O Lord: * in wisdom hast 
Thou made them all. 
Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, Thou hast been 
magnified exceedingly. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS, (17:17 - 18:5) 
A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity. A man void 
of understanding striketh hands, and becometh surety in the presence of his 
friend. He loveth transgression that loveth strife: and he that exalteth his gate 
seeketh destruction. He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that 
hath a perverse tongue falleth into mischief. He that begetteth a fool doeth it to 
his sorrow: and the father of a fool hath no joy. A merry heart doeth good like a 
medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones. A wicked man taketh a gift out 
of the bosom to pervert the ways of judgment. Wisdom is before him that hath 
understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth. A foolish son 
is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him. Also to punish the 
just is not good, nor to strike princes for equity. He that hath knowledge 
spareth his words: and a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit. Even a 
fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he that shutteth his lips is 
esteemed a man of understanding. Through desire a man, having separated 
himself, seeketh and intermeddleth with all wisdom. A fool hath no delight in 
understanding, but that his heart may discover itself. When the wicked cometh, 

--- PAGE 13 ---
then cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach. The words of a man’s 
mouth are as deep waters, and the wellspring of wisdom as a flowing brook. It 
is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in 
judgment. 
And the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts. 
 
Note: Oil and Wine are allowed in the refectory on account of the labors 
of the Vigil. Small Compline with the Canon for the Dead in the Tone of 
the Week, and the canon from the Menaion, and the Midnight Office are 
read in our Cells. 
Note: If there is no Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts, at Lord, I have 
cried..., we chant 8 Stichera to the Theotokos from Vespers:  
Revealing the pre-eternal counsel to thee O Maiden ..., (Thrice) 
Thou dost appear to me as a man” ..., (Thrice) 
When God so desireth ..., (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The mystery that is from all ages ..., 
For the Aposticha we chant the first 2 Triodion Stichera from Vespers:  
As if from Jerusalem ..., (Twice) 
O martyrs of the Lord ..., (Once) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The Theotokos heard a voice she did not recognize, * when the Archangel 
brought her the glad tidings of the Annunciation; * and, accepting his salutation 
with faith, * she conceived Thee the pre-eternal God; * wherefore greatly 
rejoicing we also cry aloud to Thee: * O God, who without change hath 
assumed flesh from her, * grant peace unto the world ** and to our souls great 
mercy. 
Followed by the usual Lenten ending for Friday Vespers without the 
Liturgy of the Presanctified.  
