--- PAGE 1 ---
SATURDAY IN THE FIFTH WEEK 
AT MATINS  
THE PRAISE OF THE MOST HOLY THEOTOKOS 
On Friday evening, about the fourth hour of the night (10 o’clock), we 
begin Matins in the usual way. After the Six Psalms and the great Litany, 
we chant: “God is the Lord ...,” with the following Troparion, sung 
slowly and solemnly, with sweet melody: 
Troparion of the Theotokos, in Tone VIII: 
Taking knowledge of the secret command, * the bodiless Archangel 
hastened to Joseph’s dwelling, * and spake to her who knew not wedlock 
saying: * “He who in His condescension hath bowed the heavens and come 
down, * is wholly and unchanged found within thee. * I behold Him taking the 
form of a servant in thy womb, * and in wonder cry aloud to thee: ** Rejoice; 
Thou Bride Unwedded” (Thrice) 
We then chant the 16th Kathisma of the Psalter; and after it, the small 
Litany. Then we chant the Kontakion, slowly and solemnly: 
Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: ** Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
The first stasis  
IKOS I 
An archangel was sent from Heaven to say to the Theotokos: Rejoice! And 
beholding Thee, O Lord, taking bodily form, he was amazed and with his 
bodiless voice he stood crying to Her such things as these:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom joy will shine forth:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom the curse will cease!  
Rejoice; Recall of fallen Adam:  
Rejoice; Redemption of the tears of Eve!  
Rejoice; Height inaccessible to human thoughts:  
Rejoice; Depth un-discernible even for the eyes of angels!  
Rejoice; For Thou art the throne of the King:  
Rejoice; For Thou bearest Him Who beareth all!  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Rejoice; Star that causest the Sun to appear:  
Rejoice; Womb of the Divine Incarnation!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom creation is renewed:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom we worship the Creator!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION II  
Seeing herself to be chaste, the holy one said boldly to Gabriel: The marvel 
of thy speech is difficult for my soul to accept. How canst thou speak of a birth 
from a seedless conception? And She cried: Alleluia!  
IKOS II 
Seeking to know knowledge that cannot be known, the Virgin cried to the 
ministering one: Tell me, how can a son be born from a chaste womb? Then he 
spake to Her in fear, only crying aloud thus:  
Rejoice; Initiate of God’s ineffable will:  
Rejoice; Assurance of those who pray in silence!  
Rejoice; Beginning of Christ’s miracles:  
Rejoice; Crown of His dogmas!  
Rejoice; Heavenly ladder by which God came down:  
Rejoice; Bridge that conveys us from earth to Heaven!  
Rejoice; Wonder of angels sounded abroad:  
Rejoice; Wound of demons bewailed afar!  
Rejoice; Thou Who ineffably gavest birth to the Light:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst reveal Thy secret to none!  
Rejoice; Thou Who surpasses the knowledge of the wise:  
Rejoice; Thou Who givest light to the minds of the faithful!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION III 
The power of the Most High then overshadowed the Virgin for conception, 
and showed Her fruitful womb as a sweet meadow to all who wish to reap 
salvation, as they sing: Alleluia!  
 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
IKOS III 
Having received God into Her womb, the Virgin hastened to Elizabeth 
whose unborn babe at once recognized Her embrace, rejoiced, and with leaps 
of joy as songs, cried to the Theotokos:  
Rejoice; Branch of an Unfading Sprout:  
Rejoice; Acquisition of Immortal Fruit!  
Rejoice; Laborer that labors for the Lover of mankind:  
Rejoice; Thou Who hast given birth to the Planter of our life!  
Rejoice; Corn-land yielding a rich crop of mercies:  
Rejoice; Table bearing a wealth of forgiveness!  
Rejoice; Thou Who makest the garden of delight to bloom:  
Rejoice; Thou Who preparest a haven for souls!  
Rejoice; Acceptable incense of intercession:  
Rejoice; Propitiation of all the world!  
Rejoice; Good will of God to mortals:  
Rejoice; Boldness of mortals before God!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION IV  
Having within a tempest of doubting thoughts, the chaste Joseph was 
troubled. For knowing Thee to have no husband, he suspected a secret union, 
O undefiled one. But having learned that Thy conception was of the Holy 
Spirit, he said: Alleluia!  
Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion again, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: * Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
We read the 17th Kathisma of the Psalter (Psalm 118); and after it, the 
Small Litany.  
 
We then again, chant the Kontakion: To Thee, the Champion Leader ..., 
and the priest readeth the 2nd stasis of the Akathist Hymn: 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
IKOS IV  
While the angels were chanting, the shepherds heard of Christ’s coming in 
the flesh, and having run to the Shepherd, they beheld Him as a blameless 
Lamb that had been pastured in Mary’s womb, and singing to Her, they cried:  
Rejoice; Mother of the Lamb and the Shepherd:  
Rejoice; Fold of rational sheep!  
Rejoice; Torment of invisible enemies:  
Rejoice; Opening of the gates of Paradise!  
Rejoice; For the things of Heaven rejoice with the earth:  
Rejoice; For the things of earth join chorus with the heavens!  
Rejoice; Never-silent mouth of the Apostles:  
Rejoice; Invincible courage of the passion-bearers!  
Rejoice; Firm support of faith:  
Rejoice; Radiant token of Grace!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom Hades was stripped bare:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom we are clothed with glory!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION V  
Having sighted the divinely-moving star, the Magi followed its radiance; and 
holding it as a lamp, by it they sought a powerful King; and having reached the 
Unapproachable One, they rejoiced, shouting to Him: Alleluia! 
IKOS V  
The sons of the Chaldees saw in the hands of the Virgin Him Who with His 
hand made man. And knowing Him to be the Master, although He had taken 
the form of a servant, they hastened to serve Him with gifts, and to cried to Her 
Who is blessed:  
Rejoice; Mother of the Unsetting Star:  
Rejoice; Dawn of the mystic day!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst extinguish the furnace of error:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst enlighten the initiates of the Trinity!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst banish from power the inhuman tyrant:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst show us Christ the Lord, the Lover of mankind!  
Rejoice; Thou Who redeemest from pagan worship:  

--- PAGE 5 ---
Rejoice; Thou Who dost drag us from the works of mire!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst quench the worship of fire:  
Rejoice; Thou Who rescuest from the flame of the passions!  
Rejoice; Guide of the faithful to chastity:  
Rejoice; Gladness of all generations!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION VI  
Having become God-bearing heralds, the Magi returned to Babylon, having 
fulfilled Thy prophecy; and having preached Thee to all as the Christ, they left 
Herod as a babbler who knew not how to sing: Alleluia! 
IKOS VI  
By shining in Egypt the light of truth, Thou didst dispel the darkness of 
falsehood; for its idols fell, O Savior, unable to endure Thy strength; and those 
who were delivered from them cried to the Theotokos:  
Rejoice; Uplifting of men:  
Rejoice; Downfall of demons!  
Rejoice; Thou who didst trample down the dominion of delusion:  
Rejoice; Thou who didst unmask the fraud of idols!  
Rejoice; Sea that didst drown the noetic Pharaoh:  
Rejoice; Rock that doth refresh those thirsting for life!  
Rejoice; Pillar of fire guiding those in darkness:  
Rejoice; Shelter of the world broader than a cloud!  
Rejoice; Sustenance replacing manna:  
Rejoice; Minister of holy delight!  
Rejoice; Land of promise:  
Rejoice; Thou from whom flows milk and honey!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION VII  
When Symeon was about to depart this age of delusion, Thou wast brought 
as a Babe to him, but Thou wast recognized by him as perfect God also; 
wherefore, marveling at Thine ineffable wisdom, he cried: Alleluia! 
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion again Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: ** Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
Note: Up to the end of ODE V, we chant the canon of the patronymic 
of the church or monastery with 6 Troparia, including the Irmos, in 
conjunction with the following Canon of the Theotokos with 6 Troparia, 
likewise including the Irmos. But if the church or monastery is dedicated 
to the Theotokos, we chant only
The Canons 
 the Canon of the Theotokos, chanting 
the Irmos of each ODE twice, and then repeating the Troparia so as to 
make up the number ten. The Irmos of the Canon of the Theotokos is 
repeated at the end as Katavasia. Between the Troparia we say: Most 
holy Theotokos, save us. 
ODE I 
The patronymic canon of the Temple, then that of the Theotokos, in Tone IV: 
Irmos: I shall open my mouth, * and be filled with the Spirit, * and utter 
discourse to the Queen and Mother; * and be seen radiantly keeping 
festival, * joyfully praising her wonders. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Beholding thee, the living book of Christ, sealed by the Spirit, the great 
archangel exclaimed to thee, O pure one: Rejoice, vessel of joy, through which 
the curse of the first mother is annulled.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, Virgin bride of God, restoration of Adam and the death of Hades. 
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, palace of the King of all. Rejoice, fiery throne of 
the Almighty.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, O thou who alone hast blossomed forth the unfading Rose. 
Rejoice, for thou hast borne the fragrant Apple. Rejoice, Maiden unwedded, the 
pure fragrance of the only King, and preservation of the world.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  

--- PAGE 7 ---
Rejoice, treasure-house of purity, by which we have risen from our fall. 
Rejoice, sweet-smelling lily which perfumeth the faithful, fragrant incense and 
most precious myrrh.  
Katavasia: I shall open my mouth ..., 
ODE III 
The patronymic canon of the Temple, then that of the Theotokos 
Irmos: O Theotokos, thou living and plentiful fount, * establish in 
spiritual fellowship those who sing hymns to thee, * and in thy divine 
glory * grant them crowns of glory.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee, the untilled field, hath grown the divine Ear of grain. Rejoice, 
living table that hath held the Bread of Life. Rejoice, O Lady, never-failing 
spring of the Living Water.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
O Heifer that bearest the unblemished Calf for the faithful, rejoice!, Ewe 
that hast brought forth the lamb of God, Who taketh away the sins of all the 
world. Rejoice, ardent mercy-seat.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice brightest dawn, who alone bearest Christ the Sun. Rejoice, dwelling-
place of Light, who hast dispersed darkness and utterly driven away the gloomy 
demons.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, only portal through which the Word alone hath passed. By thy 
birthgiving, O Lady, thou hast broken the bars and gates of Hades. Rejoice, 
Bride of God, divine entry of the saved.  
Katavasia: O Theotokos, thou living ..., 
Small Litany, Then the Choir chanteth the Kontakion again, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: ** Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
After which the priest readeth the third stasis of the Akathist Hymn: 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
IKOS VII  
A new creation hath the Creator revealed, manifesting Himself unto us His 
creatures. For He sprang from a seedless womb, and kept it incorrupt as it was, 
that seeing the miracle we might sing to Her, crying out:  
Rejoice; Flower of incorruptibility:  
Rejoice; Crown of continence!  
Rejoice; Thou from whom shineth the Archetype of the Resurrection:  
Rejoice; Thou Who revealest the life of the angels!  
Rejoice; Tree of shining fruit, whereby the faithful are nourished:  
Rejoice; Tree of goodly shade by which many are sheltered!  
Rejoice; Thou that has carried in Thy womb the Redeemer of captives:  
Rejoice; Thou that gavest birth to the Guide of those astray!  
Rejoice; Supplication before the Righteous Judge:  
Rejoice; Forgiveness of many sins!  
Rejoice; Robe of boldness for the naked:  
Rejoice; Love that doth vanquish all desire!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION VIII  
Having beheld a strange nativity, let us estrange ourselves from the world 
and transport our minds to Heaven; for the Most High God appeared on earth 
as a lowly man, because He wished to draw to the heights them that cry to Him: 
Alleluia! 
IKOS VIII  
Wholly present was the Inexpressible Word among those here below, yet in 
no way absent from those on high; for this was a divine condescension and not 
a change of place, and His birth was from a God-receiving Virgin Who heard 
these things:  
Rejoice; Container of the Uncontainable God:  
Rejoice; Door of solemn mystery!  
Rejoice; Report doubtful to unbelievers:  
Rejoice; Undoubted boast of the faithful!  
Rejoice; Most holy chariot of Him Who sitteth upon the Cherubim:  
Rejoice; All-glorious temple of Him Who is above the Seraphim!  
Rejoice; Thou Who hast united opposites:  

--- PAGE 9 ---
Rejoice; Thou Who hast joined virginity and motherhood!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom transgression hath been absolved:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom Paradise is opened!  
Rejoice; Key to the kingdom of Christ:  
Rejoice; Hope of eternal good things!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION IX  
All the angels were amazed at the great act of Thine incarnation; for they 
saw the Unapproachable God as a man approachable to all, abiding with us, and 
hearing from all: Alleluia! 
IKOS IX  
We see most eloquent orators mute as fish before Thee, O Theotokos; for 
they are at a loss to tell how Thou remainest a Virgin and could bear a child. 
But we, marveling at this mystery, cry out faithfully:  
Rejoice; Receptacle of the Wisdom of God:  
Rejoice; Treasury of His Providence!  
Rejoice; Thou Who showest philosophers to be fools:  
Rejoice; Thou Who exposest the learned as irrational!  
Rejoice; For the clever critics have become foolish:  
Rejoice; For the writers of myths have faded away!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst rend the webs of the Athenians:  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst fill the nets of the fishermen!  
Rejoice; Thou Who drawest us from the depths of ignorance:  
Rejoice; Thou Who enlightenest many with knowledge!  
Rejoice; Ship for those who wish to be saved:  
Rejoice; Harbor for sailors on the sea of life!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION X  
Desiring to save the world, He that is the Creator of all came to it according 
to His Own promise, and He that, as God, is the Shepherd, for our sake hath 
appeared unto us as a man; for like calling unto like, as God He heareth: 
Alleluia! 
 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Then the Choir again chanteth the Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: ** Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded! 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
Coming to the city of Nazareth, * the Supreme Leader of the noetic angels 
proclaimed to thee, O pure one, * the King and Lord of all ages, * saying unto 
thee: Rejoice, blessed Mary, * depth unsearchable beyond all understanding, ** 
and the recall of all mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated: 
ODE IV 
The patronymic canon of the Temple, then that of the Theotokos 
Irmos: He who sitteth in glory upon the throne of the Godhead, * Jesus 
the true God, * is come in a swift cloud * and with His sinless hands he 
hath saved those who cry: * Glory to Thy power, O Christ. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
With voices of song in faith we cry aloud to thee, who art worthy of all 
praise: Rejoice, butter mountain, mountain curdled by the Spirit. Rejoice, 
candlestick and vessel of manna, which sweeteneth the senses of all the pious.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, mercy-seat of the world, most pure Lady. Rejoice, ladder raising all 
from the earth by grace. Rejoice, bridge that in very truth hast led from death to 
life all those who hymn thee.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, higher than the heavens, who didst painlessly carry 
within thy womb the Fountain of the earth. Rejoice, sea-shell that with thy 
blood didst dye a divine purple robe for the King of Hosts.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Rejoice, Lady who in truth didst give birth to the lawgiver, Who freely 
washed clean the iniquities of all. O Maiden who hast not known wedlock, 
unfathomable depth, unutterable height, by whom we have been deified.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Praising thee who hast woven for the world a Crown not made by the hand 
of man, we cry to thee: Rejoice, O Virgin, the guardian of all mankind, fortress 
and rampart, and sacred refuge.  
Katavasia: He who sitteth in glory ..., 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE V 
The patronymic canon of the Temple, then that of the Theotokos 
Irmos: All creation stands in awe of thy divine glory; * for thou, O Virgin 
who hast not known wedlock, * didst contain within thy womb the God 
of all, * and gave birth to the timeless Son, * bestowing peace, upon all 
who hymn thee. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, all-immaculate one, who hast given birth to the Way of life, and 
who didst save the world from the flood of sin. Rejoice, Bride of God, tidings 
fearful to tell and hear. Rejoice, dwelling-place of the Master of all creation.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, most pure one, the strength and fortress of all, sanctuary of glory, 
the death of Hades, most radiant bridal chamber. Rejoice, joy of angels. Rejoice, 
helper of those who pray to thee with faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Lady, fiery chariot of the Word, living paradise, having in thy 
midst the Tree of Life, the Lord of Life, Whose sweetness vivifieth all who 
partake of Him with faith, though they have been subject to corruption.  
Refrain: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.  
Strengthened by thy might, we raise our cry to thee with faith: Rejoice, city 
of the King of all, of which things glorious and worthy to be heard were clearly 
spoken. Rejoice, unhewn mountain, unfathomed depth.  
Refrain: Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.  
Rejoice, all-pure one, spacious tabernacle of the Word, shell which 
produced the divine Pearl. Rejoice, all-wondrous Theotokos, who dost reconcile 
with God all who ever call thee blessed.  
Katavasia: All creation stands in awe ..., 
Note: We now chant the two four-canticled Canons; the Canon of the patron 
saint is omitted (if the church or monastery is not dedicated to the Theotokos). 
We first read the Canon of the Theotokos, with 6 Troparia, followed by the two 
canons from the Triodion. 
ODE VI 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV 
Irmos: Celebrating the divine and solemn feast * of the Mother of God * 
O ye divinely wise, * let us come, clapping our hands, * and glorify God 
who was born of her. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
O undefiled bridal chamber of the Word, cause of deification for all, rejoice, 
all-honorable preaching of the prophet; rejoice, adornment of the apostles.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
From thee hath come the Dew that extinguished the flame of idolatry; 
therefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, living fleece wet with dew, which Gideon saw 
of old, O Virgin.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Behold, to thee, O Virgin, we cry: Rejoice! Be thou the port and a haven for 
all that sail upon the troubled waters of affliction, amidst all the snares of the 
enemy.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Thou cause of joy, endue our thoughts with grace, that we may cry to thee: 
Rejoice, unconsumed bush, cloud of light that unceasingly overshadoweth the 
faithful.  
First four-canticled canon, by Joseph, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Beholding the sea of life surging with the tempest of temptations, 
* I run to Thy calm haven, and cry to Thee: * Raise up my life from 
corruption, * O greatly Merciful One. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Through their sufferings the martyrs became like chosen stones, rolling 
across the earth overturning every temple of the enemy; making themselves 
temples of God. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
We beseech you, O ye martyrs who have completed the good race: grant us 
strength to finish the race of the Fast, endued with glory through the perfection 
of the virtues. 
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O supremely good Lord, grant unto Thy servants who have departed from 
this earth to be partakers in Thy Kingdom, by the holy intercessions of Thy 
divine martyrs, O greatly Merciful One. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Theotokion: O thou only all-hymned one, grant unto those who faithfully 
sing thy praises, the remission of their sins, and a share in God’s gifts of grace. 
by thine intercessions to the all-holy Word, O Mother and Virgin. 
Another four-canticled canon, by Theodore, in Tone V: 
Irmos: Thou didst deliver the Prophet ..., 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
As we celebrate today the memory of the martyrs, let us with holy joy offer 
hymns of praise to the Lord. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Afraid not of the sword and fire, O victorious martyrs, but emboldened by 
your faith, ye filled the tyrants with fear and amazement. 
Glory ..., I praise Thee as Trinity in Hypostases and I worship Thee as Unity 
in Essence, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Thou art the goodly praise of angels and 
mankind, O Virgin, for thou hast borne Christ the Savior of our souls. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Receiving life in exchange for death, O glorious passion-bearers of Christ 
God, with exceedingly great joy ye dwell in the heavens.  
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Their souls shall dwell among good things. 
O Christ, Thou rulest death and life, grant rest with Thy saints to those who 
in faith, have departed this life. 
Katavasia, in Tone V: Thou didst deliver the Prophet from the whale: * 
Do Thou O Lord lead me up from the depths of sin * and save me. 
Small Litany, and the Choir again chanteth the Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: ** Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded! 
After which the priest readeth the fourth and final stasis of the Akathist 
Hymn: 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
IKOS X  
A bulwark art Thou to virgins, and to all that flee unto Thee, O Virgin 
Theotokos; for the Maker of Heaven and earth prepared Thee, O Most-pure 
one, dwelt in Thy womb, and taught all to call to Thee:  
Rejoice; Pillar of virginity:  
Rejoice; Gate of salvation!  
Rejoice; Leader of mental formation:  
Rejoice; Bestower of divine good!  
Rejoice; For Thou didst renew those conceived in shame:  
Rejoice; For Thou gavest wisdom to those robbed of their minds!  
Rejoice; Thou Who didst foil the corrupter of minds:  
Rejoice; Thou Who hast given birth to the Sower of purity!  
Rejoice; Bridal chamber of a seedless marriage:  
Rejoice; Thou Who dost wed the faithful to the Lord!  
Rejoice; Good Nourisher of virgins:  
Rejoice; Adorner of holy souls as for marriage!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION XI  
Every hymn is defeated that trieth to encompass the multitude of Thy many 
compassions; for if we offer to Thee, O Holy King, songs equal in number to 
the sand, nothing have we done worthy of that which Thou hast given us who 
shout to Thee: Alleluia!  
IKOS XI  
We behold the holy Virgin, a shining lamp appearing to those in darkness; 
for, kindling the Immaterial Light, She guideth all to divine knowledge, She 
illumineth minds with radiance, and is honored by our shouting these things:  
Rejoice; Ray of the noetic Sun:  
Rejoice; Radiance of the Unsetting Light!  
Rejoice; Lightning that enlightenest our souls:  
Rejoice; Thunder that terrifiest our enemies!  
Rejoice; For Thou didst cause the refulgent Light to dawn:  
Rejoice; For Thou didst cause the river of many streams to gush forth!  
Rejoice; Thou Who paintest the image of the font:  

--- PAGE 15 ---
Rejoice; Thou Who blottest out the stain of sin!  
Rejoice; Laver that washest the conscience clean:  
Rejoice; Cup that drawest up joy!  
Rejoice; Aroma of the sweet fragrance of Christ:  
Rejoice; Life of mystical gladness!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION XII  
When the Absolver of all mankind desired to blot out ancient debts, of His 
Own will He came to dwell among those who had fallen from His Grace; and 
having torn up the handwriting of their sins, He heareth this from all: Alleluia!  
IKOS XII  
While singing to Thine Offspring, we all praise Thee as a living temple, O 
Theotokos; for the Lord Who holdeth all things in His hand dwelt in Thy 
womb, and He sanctified and glorified Thee, and taught all to cry to Thee:  
Rejoice; Tabernacle of God the Word:  
Rejoice; Greater holy of holies!  
Rejoice; Ark gilded by the Spirit:  
Rejoice; Inexhaustible treasury of life!  
Rejoice; Precious diadem of pious kings:  
Rejoice; Venerable boast of reverent priests!  
Rejoice; Unshakable fortress of the Church:  
Rejoice; Inviolable wall of the kingdom!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom victories are obtained:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom foes fall prostrate!  
Rejoice; Healing of my flesh:  
Rejoice; Salvation of my soul!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
KONTAKION XIII  
O all-praised Mother Who didst bear the Word, the Holiest of all Holies, 
accept now our offering, and deliver from all misfortune, and rescue from the 
torment to come those who cry out together: Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! (This 
Kontakion is chanted three times)  
Then the first Ikos is chanted again:  

--- PAGE 16 ---
IKOS I 
An archangel was sent from Heaven to say to the Theotokos: Rejoice! 
(Thrice) And beholding Thee, O Lord, taking bodily form, he was amazed and 
with his bodiless voice he stood crying to Her such things as these:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom joy will shine forth:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom the curse will cease!  
Rejoice; Recall of fallen Adam:  
Rejoice; Redemption of the tears of Eve!  
Rejoice; Height inaccessible to human thoughts:  
Rejoice; Depth un-discernible even for the eyes of angels!  
Rejoice; For Thou art the throne of the King:  
Rejoice; For Thou bearest Him Who beareth all!  
Rejoice; Star that causest the Sun to appear:  
Rejoice; Womb of the Divine Incarnation!  
Rejoice; Thou through whom creation is renewed:  
Rejoice; Thou through whom we worship the Creator!  
Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  
The Choir again chanteth the Kontakion, in Tone VIII: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: ** Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded! 
SYNAXARION READING 
Verse: The city in thanksgiving and watchfulness doth praise 
Her who upholdeth and constantly watcheth in wartime, giving the 
victory. 
On this day, the Saturday of the fifth week of Great Lent, we celebrate the 
Akathist Hymn of our Most Holy Lady Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary. In 
626, when Heraclius (610-41) held the imperial authority of the Romans, 
Chozroes, the king of the Persians, seeing that Roman resources had been 
extremely depleted by the previous emperor, Phocas the Tyrant (602-10), sent 
one of his satraps named Sarvaros with many thousands of troops in order to 
subjugate the entire East to himself. Prior to this, Chozroes had captured one 
hundred thousand Christians whom their enemies bought and killed. The chief 
satrap Sarvaros ravaged the entire East and even reached as far as Chrysopolis, 

--- PAGE 17 ---
which is now called Skoutarion. Emperor Heraclius, being destitute of public 
funds, converted the sacred vessels of the churches into currency, promising to 
later replace them with more and finer ones. And thus, crossing the Black Sea 
with his ships, he invaded the regions of Persia, which he vanquished, utterly 
defeating Chozroes with his army. Shortly thereafter, Chozroes’ son Seiroes 
rebelled against his father and killed him; he assumed authority and made peace 
with Emperor Heraclius. At that time, Chaganos, the ruler of the Mysians and 
Scythians, upon learning that the emperor was across the sea with the Persians, 
broke his treaties with the Romans and, marshaling together a great army, 
attacked Constantinople from the western regions, shouting blasphemies against 
God. Hence, the sea was at once full of ships, and the land swarmed with 
countless foot soldiers and cavalry. The Patriarch Sergius did much to convince 
the populace of Constantinople not to capitulate, but to commit their every 
hope wholeheartedly to God and to His Mother, the all-immaculate Theotokos. 
Indeed, Vonos, the patrician who at that time was managing the city, began 
taking the necessary measures to repulse the attackers (for, together with the aid 
from on high, we also must do what is in our power). The Patriarch, for his 
part, taking with him the sacred icons of the Mother of God, together with the 
entire multitude, compassed the city walls from above, thereby procuring their 
security. Then, Sarvaros from the east and Chaganos from the west began to set 
fire to the areas surrounding the city, and the Patriarch circled the city walls, 
bringing with him the icon of Christ Not-Made-by-Hands and the portions of 
the precious and Life-giving Cross, as well as the precious robe of the Mother 
of God. Chaganos the Scythian, with a countless multitude of well-armed 
forces, attacked Constantinople at the walls on the land side. There were so 
many enemy forces that clearly it was one Roman fighting against ten Scythians. 
But the invincible Champion Lady destroyed many of them with the very few 
soldiers who were stationed at her Church of the Spring. Deriving fresh courage 
from this, and bolstered by such an invincible general -- the Mother of God -- 
the Romans began mightily defeating the enemy. The city’s nobles sought to 
make a peace treaty, but they were rejected by Chaganos, who replied, “Do not 
be deceived on account of the God in whom you believe, for tomorrow I shall 
by all means take your city.” Upon hearing this, the inhabitants of the city lifted 
up their hands to God. So Chaganos and Sarvaros concurred, and they attacked 
both by land and by sea, eager to take the city by means of their war engines. 
But they were defeated by the Romans to such an extent that those who 
remained alive were not sufficient to burn their dead. The canoes full of armed 
soldiers had penetrated into the so-called Horn Bay and had landed at the 
Church of the Mother of God in Blachernea. Suddenly, a violent storm fell 

--- PAGE 18 ---
upon the sea and rent it asunder. As a result, the canoes and all the enemy ships 
were destroyed, and one could see the extraordinary masterstroke of the most 
pure Mother of God. For all were washed up onto the shore at Blachernae, 
whereupon the people of the city quickly threw open the gates and utterly 
wiped them out, the women and children all performing courageously. The 
enemy leaders retreated weeping and lamenting. The God-loving people of 
Constantinople, on the other hand, exuberantly sang hymns of praise to the 
Mother of God all night without sitting (Gk. akathist), ascribing to her the favor 
of having been vigilant for their sake, and having accomplished, by supernatural 
power, victory over the enemies. So it was from that time that the Church 
instituted the tradition of dedicating such a feast to the Mother of God in 
remembrance of this great and supernatural miracle. It was named Akathist 
because all the clergy and the people stood during the service. Some thirty-six 
years later, during the reign of the emperor Constantine Pogonatos (641-68), 
the Moslems marshaled together countless forces and once more attacked 
Constantinople. And they besieged it continually for seven years; for they 
encamped and spent the winters in the regions of Cyzikos, where they ravaged 
much of the local population. Afterwards, they gave up and retreated with their 
fleet. But when they reached the Sylaeo, they all sank at sea, due to the most 
pure Mother of God’s guardianship of her people. Yet a third time, during the 
reign of Emperor Leo the Isaurian, the Moslems -- many tens of thousands in 
number -- first vanquished the kingdom of the Persians, then Egypt and Libya, 
and also invaded the regions of India, Ethiopia, and Spain. Finally, in 717 under 
the Saracen leader Maslamah, they marched against the very Queen of Cities 
itself, together with a fleet of eighteen hundred ships. Having surrounded the 
city, they expected to take it at once. The pious people of Constantinople 
propitiated God with tears, circling the city walls with the venerable wood of 
the precious and Life-giving Cross and the august icon of the Mother of God, 
the “Directress.” With optimistic expectations, the Moslems divided into two 
groups: the one marching against the Bulgars and incurring over twenty 
thousand casualties, the other remaining to take the city. Hindered by the chain 
that extended from Galatas to the city walls, and almost entering the so-called 
Sosthenion, there a north wind fell on them, and most of their ships were 
broken and destroyed. The remaining forces encountered great famine and were 
forced to eat human flesh mingled with dung. Then, retreating to the Aegean, 
they sank at high sea, together with all their ships, on the eve of the 
Annunciation, March 24, 718, for a hailstorm fell upon them from heaven 
which caused the sea to boil, dissolving the pitch on the ships. And thus, that 
immense fleet with all its crew utterly perished except for three craft, which 

--- PAGE 19 ---
were spared in order to report the event. So, it is because of all these 
supernatural wonders of the most pure Mother of God that we celebrate this 
feast. It was named Akathist because the entire population sang the Hymn to 
the Mother of the Logos that night without sitting, and also because we 
customarily sit for all other hymns, whereas for these hymns to the Mother of 
God, we listen to them standing. 
Through the intercessions of Thy Mother, the Unassailable Champion, O Christ 
our God, redeem us from besetting calamities, and have mercy on us and save 
us, as the only Lover of Mankind. Amen. 
ODE VII 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV 
Irmos: Refusing to worship created things * in place of the Creator, * the 
divinely wise youths bravely trampled down the threatening fire * and 
rejoicing they sang aloud: * O supremely hymned Lord and God of our 
Fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We sing of thee, crying aloud: Rejoice, chariot of the noetic Sun; true vine, 
that hast produced ripe grapes, from which floweth a wine making glad the 
souls of those who glorify thee in faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Rejoice, O Bride of God, who hast given birth to the Healer of all; thou 
mystical staff, that didst blossom with the unfading Flower. Rejoice, O Lady, 
through whom we are filled with joy and inherited life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
No tongue, however eloquent, hath power to sing thy praises, O Lady; for 
thou art exalted above the seraphim, having given birth to Christ the King, 
Whom do thou beseech to deliver from all harm those that venerate thee in 
faith.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
The ends of the earth praise thee and call thee blessed, and they cry to thee 
with love: Rejoice, pure scroll, upon which the Word was written by the finger 
of the Father. Do thou beseech Him to inscribe thy servants in the book of life, 
O Theotokos.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  

--- PAGE 20 ---
We thy servants pray to thee and bend the knees of our hearts: Incline thine 
ear, O pure one; save thy servants who are always sinking, and preserve thy city 
from every enemy captivity, O Theotokos.  
First four-canticled canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: An Angel made the furnace bedew the holy Children. * But the 
command of God consumed the Chaldeans * and prevailed upon the 
tyrant to cry: * O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
The glorious company of Thy divine martyrs O greatly merciful One, now 
dwelleth in Thy never-waning light. By their intercessions, grant unto all of us 
enlightenment and cleansing of our sins, O Christ. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
How beautiful is the season of abstinence which Thou hast given us, O 
Lord! In which, O Good One, have compassion upon our souls, by the prayers 
of Thy holy and precious martyrs who love the beauty of Thy sacred Passion. 
For the Reposed: 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
Bring Thy servants who have passed through the storm of this life, O 
Master of life, to Thy safe harbor. That they may cry aloud with all Thine elect: 
“O God of our fathers, Blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Theotokion: Thou hast given birth to the Giver of the Law, O Ever-Virgin, 
pray to Him that in this season He may uproot all wickedness from those who 
zealously keep the holy Fast. 
Second four-canticled canon, in Tone V: 
 Irmos: Blessed art Thou, O God ..., 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Blessed art Thou, O all-praised and exceedingly glorified God, who hast 
shown the martyrs who suffered for Thy sake to be courageous. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Blessed art Thou, O all-praised and exceedingly glorified God, who hast 
given to us Thy victorious martyrs as our intercessors. 
Glory ..., Blessed art Thou, O all-praised and exceedingly glorified God, one 
by Nature yet known in three Hypostases. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Blessed art Thou, O all-praised and exceedingly 
glorified God, who wast born without seed and kept Thy Mother ever-virginal. 
Refrain: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Blessed art Thou, O all-praised and exceedingly glorified God, who hast 
tamed wild beasts and quenched fire, to the glory of Thy saints. 
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
Blessed art Thou, O God, who hast translated from death unto eternal life 
all who in this life served and worshipped Thee with faith. 
Katavasia, in Tone V: Blessed art Thou, O God, * who beholdest the 
depths * and sittest upon the throne of glory: * for Thou art supremely 
praised and glorified above all. 
ODE VIII 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV 
Irmos: The Offspring of the Theotokos * saved the holy children in the 
furnace. * He who was then prefigured hath now been born on earth, * 
and He gathereth all creation to hymn thee: * all ye works praise ye the 
Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Within thy womb thou hast received the Word; thou hast carried Him who 
carrieth all; O pure one, thou hast fed with milk Him Who by His beck feedeth 
the whole world. To Him we sing: Sing to the Lord, all ye His works, and 
supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Moses perceived in the burning bush the great mystery of thy childbearing, 
while the youths clearly prefigured it as they stood in the midst of the fire and 
were not consumed, O Virgin pure and inviolate. Therefore do we hymn thee 
and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
We who once through falsehood were stripped naked, have been clothed in 
the robe of incorruption by thy childbearing; and we who once sat in the 
darkness of sin have seen the light, O Maiden, dwelling-place of Light. 
Therefore we hymn thee, and supremely exalt thee throughout all ages.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Through thee the dead are brought to life, for thou hast borne the 
Hypostatic Life. They who once were mute are now made to speak well; lepers 
are cleansed, diseases are driven out, the hosts of the spirits of the air are 
conquered, O Virgin, the salvation of mankind.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Thou didst bear the salvation of the world, O pure one, and through thee 
we were raised from earth to heaven. Rejoice, all-blessed, protection and 
strength, rampart and fortress of those who sing: O all ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages. 
First four-canticled canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: Thou didst make flame bedew the holy children, * and didst burn 
the sacrifice of a righteous man with water. * For Thou alone, O Christ, 
dost do all as Thou willest, * Thee do we exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
The victory of the holy martyrs marveled the heavenly noetic powers; By 
their prayers bestow upon us the rich wonders of Thy mercy, O compassionate 
Master. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
With divine dew ye trampled down fire, O wonder-worthy martyrs of the 
Lord; deliver us from the fire of punishment, by your fervent intercessions to 
the Master. 
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O supremely good Word, grant heavenly life and the illumination of 
holiness to the Orthodox who have departed from us, by the prayers of the 
passion-bearers. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Theotokion: O compassionate One, by the prayers of her who gave birth to 
thee, and of the holy martyrs and apostles, enlighten our souls, that rejoicing we 
may glorify Thee throughout the ages. 
Second four-canticled canon, in Tone V: 
Irmos: The Fashioner of all creation ..., 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
O Holy choirs of martyrs, remember us who sing your praises with love, 
supremely exalting Christ throughout all ages. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Beheaded with the sword, the martyrs rejoiced, singing in praise of Christ 
and supremely exalting Him throughout all ages. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord 

--- PAGE 23 ---
In a strange and wondrous manner the Trinity is divided, while yet as God 
remaining indivisible, Whom we supremely exalt throughout all ages.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: A Virgin hath given birth to a Child, whereby 
God became a man. Let all creation sing His praises throughout the ages. 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
The martyrs were manifest as pillars of courage, triumphing over the fall of 
the devil; and they sing in praise of Christ throughout the ages. 
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Their souls shall dwell among good things. 
Deem worthy of a place in the bosom of Abraham, O Lord, Thy servants 
who with hope and faith have gone to dwell with Thee. 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia, in Tone V: The Fashioner of all creation, * whom the angels 
fear: * let us praise, O ye people, * and supremely exalt throughout all 
ages! 
And then we chant the Hymn of the most holy Theotokos (the Magnificat) 
ODE IX 
Canon of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone IV 
Irmos: Let every mortal born on earth, * radiant with light, in spirit leap 
for joy; * and let the host of the angelic powers * celebrate and honor the 
holy feast of the Mother of God, * and let them cry aloud: * Rejoice! O 
all-blessed Theotokos, * thou pure Ever-Virgin. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Let us, the faithful, call to thee: Rejoice! Through thee, O Maiden, we have 
become partakers of everlasting joy. Save us from temptations, from barbarian 
captivity, and from every other injury that befalleth sinful men because of the 
multitude of their transgressions.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Thou hast appeared as our enlightenment and confirmation; wherefore, we 
cry to thee: Rejoice, never-setting star that bringeth into the world the great 
Sun. Rejoice, pure Virgin who hast opened the closed Eden. Rejoice, pillar of 
fire, leading mankind to a higher life.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Let us stand with reverence in the house of our God, and let us cry aloud: 
Rejoice, Sovereign Lady of the world. Rejoice, Mary, Lady of us all. Rejoice, 
thou who alone art immaculate and fair among women. Rejoice, vessel that 
receivedst the inexhaustible myrrh poured out upon thee.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Thou dove who hast borne the Merciful One, rejoice, ever-virgin! Rejoice, 
glory of all the saints. Rejoice, crown of martyrs. Rejoice, divine adornment of 
all the righteous and salvation of us the faithful.  
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Spare Thine inheritance, O God, and pass over all our sins now, for as 
intercessor in Thy sight, O Christ, Thou hast her who on earth gave birth to 
Thee without seed, when in Thy great mercy Thou didst will to take the form of 
a man.  
First four-canticled canon, in Tone VI: 
Irmos: It is impossible for mankind to see God * upon Whom the orders 
of Angels dare not gaze; * but through thee, O all-pure one, * did the 
Word Incarnate become a man * and with the Heavenly Hosts * Him we 
magnify and thee we call blessed. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Dawning as doth the light of the rising sun, the martyrs have illumined all 
the earth with the rays of true piety, and with the brilliance of their radiant 
miracles they have destroyed the darkness of pagan idolatry. By their prayers, O 
God, have mercy upon us. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
O invincible army of martyrs, strengthen us all to fight the good fight and 
complete the course of the Fast, that living a life of holiness we may with joy 
become partakers of life. 
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Wondrous is God in His saints, the God of Israel. 
O Lord, may Thy goodness accompany those who have departed from us at 
Thy dread command. Encircle them with Thy mercy and guide them to those 
dwellings, made radiant with the light of Thy countenance. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos, save us.  
Theotokion: With the voice of the angel, thou didst ineffably conceive the 
Angel of the Father’s counsel, O Theotokos; Accept then the voices of us thy 
servants, that the prayers we offer in this season of the Fast, may be brought 
before God as fragrant incense. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Second four-canticled canon, in Tone V: 
Irmos: O Isaiah, dance now and be glad ..., 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Celebrating a solemnity in honor of the martyrs, O ye peoples, let us dance 
for joy today, singing to Christ, who hath set the contest and given them victory 
over their enemies: let us magnify Him in song. 
Refrain: All ye Saints pray to God for us. 
Torn with nails and cut in pieces by the sword, ye were united to Christ in a 
bond of love, O all-praised martyrs. Now that ye rejoice in heaven, intercede on 
behalf of us all. 
Glory ..., I hymn the consubstantial, beginningless Trinity, the source of life, 
and undivided Unity: the Father unbegotten, the Word and Son begotten, and 
the Holy Spirit, save us who glorify Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Beyond understanding is thy childbearing, O 
Mother of God. For without a man thou hast conceived, and in virginity thou 
hast given birth; and the Child that thou didst bear is God. Him do we magnify, 
O Virgin, and thee do we call blessed. 
Refrain: In the saints that are in His earth hath the Lord been wondrous. 
The noble army of the King and God of all, the martyrs, let us crown with 
songs, O ye peoples: for they have manifestly defeated the demonic hosts, 
wherefore we sing their praises, and magnify the Master. 
For the reposed: 
Refrain: Blessed are they whom Thou hast chosen and taken to Thyself, 
O Lord. 
When Thou shalt raise all creation for judgment O Christ, have mercy on 
Thy faithful servants whom Thou hast taken to Thyself, forgive them all their 
sins in this life, and with Thy saints grant them rest throughout all ages. 
Katavasia, in Tone V: O Isaiah, rejoice and be glad! * The Virgin hath 
conceived, * and she hath borne a Son, Emmanuel, * who is both God 
and man; * and Orient is His name; * Him we magnify, and thee O 
Virgin we call blessed. 
Exapostilarion of the most holy Theotokos, in Tone III: 
The mystery hidden from all ages * hath been made known today. * God 
from God, the Word hath become in His compassion * the Son of the Virgin 
Mary, * and Gabriel proclaimeth the Gospel of joy. * With him let us all cry 
aloud: ** Rejoice! Mother of the Lord. (Thrice) 
 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone IV: 
A hidden mystery, unknown to the angels, * hath been entrusted to the 
Archangel Gabriel. * Coming now to thee, the dove who alone art unsullied and 
pure, * the restoration of mankind, * he shall greet thee, O most Holy one, with 
the salutation: * “Rejoice! Make ready to receive through a word, ** God the 
Word within thy womb” (Twice) 
A light-filled Canopy hath been prepared for Thee, O Master: * the 
undefiled womb of the Maiden of God. * Come Thou down and enter therein, 
* and have compassion upon Thy creatures, * whom in his envy, and through 
his machinations * the deceiver hath held in bondage. * Having lost their 
former beauty, ** they await Thy salvific coming. 
Gabriel the Archangel * shall come to thee openly, O all-immaculate one, * 
and shall cry aloud to thee: * “Rejoice, thou destruction of the curse, * and the 
raising of the fallen; * Rejoice, thou who alone wast chosen by God; * Rejoice, 
chariot of the Sun’s glory. * Receive Him that hath no body, ** whose will it 
was, to dwell within thy womb.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
The Theotokos heard an unrecognizable voice, * when the Archangel 
brought her the glad tidings of the Annunciation; * and, upon accepting his 
salutation with faith, * she conceived Thee the pre-eternal God; * wherefore 
greatly rejoicing we also cry aloud to Thee: * O God, who without change hath 
assumed flesh from her, * grant peace to the world ** and to our souls great 
mercy. 
Great Doxology, the two Litanies, and the Dismissal.  
Note: Immediately there followeth the First Hour, read as it is outside 
lent, with the following Troparion and Kontakion: 
Troparion of the Akathist: 
Taking knowledge of the secret command, * the bodiless Archangel 
hastened to Joseph’s dwelling, * and spake to her who knew not wedlock 
saying: * “He who in His condescension hath bowed the heavens and come 
down, * is wholly and unchanged found within thee. * I behold Him taking the 
form of a servant in thy womb, * and in wonder cry aloud to thee: ** Rejoice; 
Thou Bride Unwedded” 
Kontakion of the most holy Theotokos: 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  

--- PAGE 27 ---
AT LITURGY 
On the Beatitudes we chant 3 Troparia from ODE III and 3 Troparia 
from ODE VI of the Canon of the most holy Theotokos: 
From thee, the untilled field, hath grown the divine Ear of grain. Rejoice, 
living table that hath held the Bread of Life. Rejoice, O Lady, never-failing 
spring of the Living Water.  
O Heifer that bearest the unblemished Calf for the faithful, rejoice, Ewe that 
hast brought forth the lamb of God Who taketh away the sins of all the world. 
Rejoice, ardent mercy-seat.  
Rejoice brightest dawn, who alone bearest Christ the Sun. Rejoice, dwelling-
place of Light, who hast dispersed darkness and utterly driven away the gloomy 
demons.  
From thee hath come the Dew Who quenched the flame of idolatry; 
therefore, we cry to thee: Rejoice, living fleece wet with dew, which Gideon saw 
of old, O Virgin.  
Glory ..., Behold, to thee, O Virgin, we cry: Rejoice! Be thou the port and a 
haven for all who sail upon the troubled waters of affliction, amidst all the 
snares of the enemy.  
 Both now ..., Thou cause of joy, imbue our thoughts with grace, that we 
may cry to thee: Rejoice, unconsumed bush, cloud of light that unceasingly 
overshadowest the faithful.  
At the entrance, the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Taking knowledge of the secret command, * the bodiless Archangel 
hastened to Joseph’s dwelling, * and spake to her who knew not wedlock 
saying: * “He who in His condescension hath bowed the heavens and come 
down, * is wholly and unchanged found within thee. * I behold Him taking the 
form of a servant in thy womb, * and in wonder cry aloud to thee: ** Rejoice; 
Thou Bride Unwedded” 
 
 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Kontakion, in Tone VIII 
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory 
and of thanksgiving * as ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: * but as 
Thou art one with might which is invincible, * from all dangers that can be do 
Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: * Rejoice; Thou Bride Unwedded!  

--- PAGE 28 ---
Prokeimenon, in Tone III, the Hymn of the Theotokos: 
Prokeimenon: My soul doth magnify the Lord, * and my spirit hath 
rejoiced in God my Savior. 
Verse: For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for 
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 
 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (9:24 - 28) 
Brethren: Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which 
are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence 
of God for us: Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest 
entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others; For then must he 
often have suffered since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end 
of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And 
as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment: So Christ 
was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him 
shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (9:1 - 7) 
Brethren: Verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and 
a worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the 
candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary. And 
after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; Which had 
the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, 
wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and 
the tables of the covenant; And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the 
mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things 
were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, 
accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the high priest 
alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for 
the errors of the people:  
 
Alleluia in Tone VIII: 
Verse: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest: Thou and the Ark of Thy holiness. 
Verse: Lord, remember David and all his meekness. 
 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (8:27-31) - Day 

--- PAGE 29 ---
At that time: Jesus and his disciples went out, into the towns of Caesarea 
Philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do 
men say that I am? And they answered, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; 
and others, One of the prophets. And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that 
I am? And Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ. And he 
charged them that they should tell no man of him. And he began to teach them, 
that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and 
of the chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (10:38 - 42; 11:27-28) - Feast 
At that time: Jesus and His disciples entered into a certain village: and a 
certain woman named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister 
called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word. But Martha was 
cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not 
care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help 
me. And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and 
troubled about many things: But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen 
that good part, which shall not be taken away from her. And it came to pass, as 
he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and 
said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou 
hast sucked. But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, 
and keep it. 
 
Communion verse: I will take the cup of salvation, and I will call upon 
the name of the Lord. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. 
 
 
