--- PAGE 1 ---
MONDAY IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in the Tone of the week: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Triadicon (Hymns to the Trinity) in the 
Tone of the week, each one only once, followed by the 4th Kathisma, the 
Sessional Hymns from the Oktoechos, in the Tone of the week. After 
the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma V), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone I: 
Having rolled away the stone of hardness from my heart, * raise up my soul 
deadened by passions, O good One, * and grant me to bring palms of virtues 
unto Thee * the Victor over Hades, * that I may obtain eternal life, * chanting 
the praises of Thy power and Thy loving-kindness, ** O only Lover of 
mankind. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Beholding within thee O full of grace, * the wonder of wonders, * creation 
doth rejoice; * for thou didst conceive without seed and ineffably give birth 
unto Him * Whom the ranks of angels cannot behold. ** Him do thou entreat 
on behalf of our souls!  
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kathisma VI), the Sessional Hymns: 
In Tone I: 
The sixth week of the Fast is before us, * let us sing a preparatory hymn for 
the Feast of Palms unto Christ, * Who hath come for our sake, seated on the 
foal of an ass, * that as King he may subdue the nations to His Father. * Let us 
all prepare for Him palm-branches of virtues, ** that with rejoicing we may 
behold His Resurrection. 
Glory ..., the foregoing is repeated.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Stretching forth thy divine arms, wherewith thou didst bear the Creator 
Who in His goodness hath become incarnate, O most pure virgin, beseech Him 
to deliver from temptations, sufferings and tribulations those who praise thee 
with love and cry aloud: Glory to Him Who made His abode within thee! Glory 
to Him Who issued forth from thee! Glory to Him Who hath delivered us by 
thy birthgiving!  
Then Psalm 50, after which we chant the canon from the Menaion, and 
the two three-canticled canons from the Triodion; for those ODES we 
chant the ODE of the second Triodion canon as Katavasia. 
The Canons 
ODE I 
First canon, by Joseph, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us all chant a triumphant hymn unto God * Who wrought 
wondrous miracles * with His upraised arm, * and saved Israel, * for He 
hath been glorified.  
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Through abstinence let us put to death the passions, and through noetic 
activity let us enliven the spirit, that with pure minds we may behold the holy 
Passion of Christ. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O compassionate Lover of mankind, I have followed the ways of the rich 
man who lacked all compassion; but I pray Thee, number me with the beggar 
Lazarus, and deliver me from the flames of the unquenchable fire. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
O Lord, I have abstained from every act of virtue, and filled myself with sin. 
and now insofar as I hunger: feed me with the precious food of salvation. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: O undefiled Lady, as an outcast I am condemned because of 
my actions: save me and have compassion upon me, for thou hast given birth to 
God the all-compassionate One. 
Another canon, by Theodore, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Let us sing a triumphant hymn ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee O God, Glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
O ye faithful, let us prepare to greet the bright feast of Palms, joyfully 
celebrating the days leading up to it, that we may be deemed worthy to behold 
the lifegiving Passion. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee O God, Glory to Thee. 
Christ draweth near and cometh to Jerusalem, seated as a King upon the 
foal of an ass, that He may subdue the nations beneath the Father’s yoke. 
Glory ..., One in Godhead, a Unity in three Hypostases, God and Father 
unbegotten, the only-begotten Son, and one Holy Spirit, a single Sovereignty 
and power, save us all. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: Most wondrous things have been spoken of thee 
throughout all the world, for thou didst give birth in the flesh to the Maker of 
all, O Theotokos Mary, who art unwedded and hath not known a man. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Behold, Christ cometh to the city of Bethphage, rejoice Bethany! home of 
Lazarus, for a great miracle shall be revealed to thee, the raising of Lazarus from 
the dead. 
Katavasia: Let us sing a triumphant hymn unto God, * who came to 
Moses’ aid in Egypt, * and drowned Pharaoh with all his host: * for He 
hath been glorified. 
ODE VIII 
First canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Him of whom the angels and all the hosts of heaven are in awe * 
as their Lord and Creator, * ye priests hymn, ye children praise, * ye 
peoples bless and supremely exalt * throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Wretched as I am, I have grown rich in unprofitable thoughts; having 
defiled my soul with lawless pleasures, the darkness of despair hath 
encompassed me. O my God, illumine me with the light of repentance. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
As once Thou didst give light to the man blind from birth, illumine my soul 
blinded by Thy Light, O merciful One, for it hath been buried in the darkness 
of sinful neglect, and the cares of this life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Through fasting Elijah opened the heavens and watered the thirsty earth 
with rain. Let us also fast, that we may draw forth streams of tears from our 
soul, and be granted mercy. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: As a living vine, O pure Virgin, thou hast borne for us the ripe 
Cluster of grapes, from which floweth the wine of forgiveness, drying up the 
drunkenness of sin. 
Second canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: We offer unto Thee the hymn ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee O God, Glory to Thee. 
The door of the forecourt leading to the raising of Lazarus hath been 
opened to us: for lo! Christ hath come, to awaken the dead man as if from 
sleep, overthrowing death by life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee O God, Glory to Thee. 
Great is Thy glory, O Bethany! For thou hast been deemed worthy to 
receive the Creator as Thy guest, wherefore cry aloud: “O ye works of the Lord, 
bless ye the Lord.” 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
Let us glorify Thee, O Thrice Hypostatic Unity, one in Essence yet distinct 
in Hypostases, the Father, Son and divine Spirit. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: With the angel we cry unto thee “Rejoice!”, for 
from thee hath sprung forth the Joy and Savior of the world, Entreat Him on 
behalf of us all, O all-hymned Virgin. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
We offer unto Thee a hymn O Christ; for thou Who dost ride upon the foal, 
and sittest upon the cherubim in the highest, hast brought all mankind into 
subjection by Thy sovereign power. 
Verse: We praise, we bless, and we worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: We offer unto Thee the hymn of the bodiless hosts, * as did 
the Children in the furnace, * and we sing Thy praises, saying: * “Bless 
ye the Lord, all ye works of the Lord.” 
ODE IX 
First canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: The ever-flowing wellspring of life, * light-bearing candlestick of 
grace, * the animate temple, and most pure cloud, * wider than the 
heavens and the earth, * the Theotokos do we the faithful magnify. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
I have been slain by my many sins, and am imprisoned in the tomb of 
negligence, laying beneath the stone of despair. Do Thou remove it in Thy 
mercy, O Christ, and raise me up as once Thou didst Lazarus. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us flee the example of the rich man, who was condemned to everlasting 
fire, and let us love the example of Lazarus who was patient in his sufferings, 
that we may find a place in the bosom of Abraham when we pass from this life. 
Refrain: Have mercy on me O God, have mercy on me. 
Let us with gladness observe the Fast which doth slay our passions; let us 
steadfastly devote ourselves to prayer; fervently weeping, mourning and 
lamenting, that we may be comforted by Jesus and be made heirs of His 
kingdom. 
Refrain: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Theotokion: The Divine treasury of virginity, the only restoration of our 
forefathers, the fountain flowing with the deep waters of lovin-kindness, the 
beauty of Jacob: let us hymn the praises of the Theotokos, for through her we 
have been saved. 
Second canon, in Tone I: 
Irmos: Thou art the gate seen by Ezekiel ..., 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Today Christ hath made manifest the illness of Lazarus, while staying 
beyond the regions of the Jordan, as one Who doth know all that will come to 
pass, saying: “This sickness is not unto death.”  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Make ready, O Bethany, adorn thy godly gates, open wide thy courts; for 
behold, the Master with the apostles shall enter therein, to bring life to your 
offspring. 
Glory ..., The host of six-winged seraphim doth glorify Thee, the tri-
hypostatic Unity, undivided Essence; and with all mankind we magnify Thee 
with hymns. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: In ways transcending expression, Thou wast 
begotten outside time from the Father, and born within time from Thy Mother 
for the salvation of all; wherefore in our hymns, as Creator and Master, we 
magnify Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
With branches of benevolence and palms of purity, let us all make ready to 
meet Christ who cometh to Jerusalem as our God. 
Katavasia: Thou art the gate seen by Ezekiel the Prophet of old, * 
through which none hath passed save God alone; * wherefore with 
hymns, O Virgin Theotokos, we honor thee. 
The small litany. 
The Exapostilarion of the day from the Oktoechos; Glory ..., the 
Exapostilarion from the Menaion, if such is appointed; Both now ..., the 
Theotokion. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone V: 
Condemn me not, O Christ, * to the flames of Gehenna, * as was the rich 
man through his neglect of Lazarus; * but grant even to me, who asketh with 
tears, * a drop of Thy love for mankind, O God, ** and have mercy on me. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
Repeat: Condemn me not, O Christ ..., 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone VIII: 
Blessed is the army of the heavenly King: * for though the passion-bearers 
were born of this earth, * they despised their bodies and hastened to attain to 
the angelic state; * and by their sufferings were deemed worthy of the honour of 
the bodiless ones. ** By their prayers, O Lord, save our souls. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone VIII: 
O thou who art full of grace, * intercede by thy supplications, * and beg that 
a multitude of compassions be granted to our souls * and the cleansing of our 
many sins, ** we entreat thee.  
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately beginneth the first hour. Without the 
reading of a Kathisma. The 7th Kathisma is read at the Third Hour, the 
8th at the Sixth Hour, the 9th at the Ninth Hour.  
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone III: 
This is the fearful day, O God, * the evening of which we hoped not to 
reach; * but in Thy love for mankind * Thou hast deemed us worthy to behold 
it. ** O Thrice-Holy One, glory be to Thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Let the heart of them be glad * that seek the Lord. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon His Name. 
 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (48:17 - 49:4) 
Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the Lord 
thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou 
shouldest go. O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy 
peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea: Thy seed 
also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel 
thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me. 
Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing 
declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath 
redeemed his servant Jacob. And they thirsted not when he led them through 
the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the 
rock also, and the waters gushed out. There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the 
wicked. Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord 
hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made 
mention of my name. And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the 
shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver 
hath he hid me; And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I 
will be glorified. Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength 
for naught, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work 
with my God. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Blessed is the Lord God of Israel * from everlasting to 
everlasting. 
Verse: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good. 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
MONDAY IN THE SIXTH WEEK 
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 6 Stichera: 
3 Stichera from the Triodion, two by Joseph, in Tone VI: 
My wretched soul hath been weakened by my many sins * and by the 
pleasures of this life, * and I lay upon the bed of slothfulness, * O Master I cry 
to Thee: * O merciful One come and visit me, * and grant me health and mercy. 
* Forsake me not, lest I sleep unto death * and the enemy rejoiceth over my 
downfall: * for he ever seeketh me, O Savior, ** to lead me into the depths of 
Hades. 
I have rivaled in foolishness the unmerciful rich man, * overwhelmed by 
sensuality and passions, I rejoice in pleasures. * Like Lazarus my mind ever 
layeth at the gates of penitence, O Lord, * but with indifference I pass it by, * 
leaving it hungry, sick and wounded by the passions. * Wherefore I am 
deserving of the flames of Gehenna: * but do Thou deliver me from them, O 
Master, ** for Thou alone art rich in mercy. 
One by Theodore, in Tone V:  
O Lord, while dwelling in the flesh on the far side of the Jordan, * Thou 
didst foretell that the sickness of Lazarus would not be unto death, * but rather 
it would be unto Thy glory, O our God. * Glory to Thy mighty acts and Thine 
all-sovereign power, * for Thou hast destroyed death ** in Thy great mercy O 
Lover of mankind. 
And 3 Stichera from the Menaion:  
Glory ..., Both now ..., the Theotokion from the Menaion; 
“O joyous Light ...”: 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: O give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good: * for His 
mercy endureth for ever. 
Verse: So let them say that have been redeemed by the Lord. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (27:1 - 14) 
And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that 
he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and 
he said unto him, Behold, here am I. And he said, Behold now, I am old, I 
know not the day of my death: Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, 
thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; And 
make me savory meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat; that my 
soul may bless thee before I die. And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau 

--- PAGE 10 ---
his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it. And 
Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak 
unto Esau thy brother, saying, Bring me venison, and make me savory meat, 
that I may eat, and bless thee before the Lord before my death. Now therefore, 
my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee. Go now to 
the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make 
them savory meat for thy father, such as he loveth: And thou shalt bring it to 
thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before his death. And 
Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and 
I am a smooth man: My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to 
him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. And his 
mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and 
go fetch me them. And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: 
and his mother made savory meat, such as his father loved. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VII: 
Prokeimenon: Be Thou exalted above the heavens, O God: * and Thy 
glory above all the earth. 
Verse: Ready is my heart O God, ready is my heart. 
A READING FROM THE BOOK OF PROVERBS (19:16 - 25) 
He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; but he that 
despiseth his ways shall die. He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the 
Lord; and that which he hath given will he pay him again. Chasten thy son while 
there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying. A man of great wrath 
shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again. Hear 
counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end. 
There are many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless the counsel of the Lord, 
that shall stand. The desire of a man is his kindness: and a poor man is better 
than a liar. The fear of the Lord tendeth to life: and he that hath it shall abide 
satisfied; he shall not be visited with evil. A slothful man hideth his hand in his 
bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again. Smite a scorner, 
and the simple will beware: and reprove one that hath understanding, and he 
will understand knowledge. 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera, in Tone IV: 
Deliver us from soul-destructive greed O Savior, * and grant us a place with 
Lazarus the beggar in the bosom of Abraham. * For Thou Who art rich in 
mercy * willingly becoming poor for our sakes, * leading us up from corruption 
to incorruption, * as Thou art a merciful God ** and the Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Verse: Unto Thee have I lifted up mine eyes, unto Thee that dwellest in 
heaven. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their 
masters, as the eyes of the handmaid look unto the hands of her 
mistress, so do our eyes look unto the Lord our God, * until He take pity 
on us. 
Repeat: Deliver us from soul-destructive greed O Savior ..., 
Verse: Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for greatly are we 
filled with abasement. Greatly hath our soul been filled therewith; let 
reproach come upon them that prosper, * and abasement on the proud.  
Of the holy martyrs, in Tone IV: 
Thou hast accepted the patience of the holy martyrs: * in Thy love accept 
also our hymns of praise, ** and by their intercessions grant us Thy great mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Theotokion:  
Deliver us from our needs, * O Mother of Christ God, * thou who hast 
given birth to the Creator of all, * that we all may cry out to thee: ** Rejoice, O 
thou who alone art the intercessor for our souls!  
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (No Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  

--- PAGE 12 ---
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Holy God, Holy Mighty ..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ...,  
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
Reader: O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible 
Kingdom, and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a 
sinner; make steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine 
every defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: 
One is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father. Amen. 
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore (Thrice). Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
PSALM 33 (read or sung) 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  

--- PAGE 13 ---
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
