--- PAGE 1 ---
HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY  
AT MATINS 
The usual beginning, with the Six psalms, the great Litany and then, in 
place of “God is the Lord ...,” we chant, in Tone VIII: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Behold the Bridegroom cometh in the middle of the night; * and blessed is 
the servant whom He shall find watching, * but unworthy is he whom He shall 
find in slothfulness. * Beware, then, O my soul, and be not overcome by sleep, 
* lest thou be given over to death and shut out from the Kingdom. * But rise up 
and cry aloud: Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O God: ** through the Theotokos 
have mercy upon us. (Thrice) 
After the 1st chanting of the Psalter (Kath. IX) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
Let us love the Bridegroom, O brethren, * and prepare our lamps, * shining 
with the virtues and a right faith; * that, like the wise virgins of the Lord, * we 
may be ready to enter with Him into the wedding feast. * For as God He 
granteth unto all ** the Bridegroom’s gift; an incorruptible crown. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 2nd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. X) Sessional Hymn, in Tone IV: 
With envy, the priests and scribes wickedly gathered * a lawless council 
against Thee, O Savior, * and inspired Judas to betray Thee. * Wherefore he 
shamelessly left, having spoken against Thee * to the transgressing people, 
saying: * “What will ye give me, and I will betray Him into your hands?” * Do 
Thou O Lord deliver our souls, ** from the condemnation that was his. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
After the 3rd chanting of the Psalter (Kath. XI) Sessional Hymn, in Tone VIII: 
Judas, with avaricious thoughts, schemeth as an enemy against the Master, * 
pondering how he will betray Him; * and falling away from the light he 

--- PAGE 2 ---
accepteth the darkness; * agreeing upon a price, he selleth Him that is above all 
price; * and as the reward for his actions, * in his wretchedness he hath received 
a hangman’s noose and an agonizing death. * O Christ God, deliver us from 
such a fate, * and grant the forgiveness of sins ** unto those who with love 
celebrate Thy most pure Passion. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated. 
Then followeth the Gospel reading: 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (22:15 - 23:39) 
At that time: the Pharisees, took counsel how they might entangle Jesus in 
his talk. And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, 
Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, 
neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men. Tell 
us therefore, what thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? 
But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? 
Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny. And he saith 
unto them, whose is this image and superscription? They say unto him, 
Caesar’s. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things 
which are Caesar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s. When they had 
heard these words, they marveled, and left him, and went their way. The same 
day came to him the Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, and 
asked him, Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his 
brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. Likewise the 
second also, and the third, unto the seventh. And last of all the woman died 
also. Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? for 
they all had her. Jesus answered and said unto them, ye do err, not knowing the 
scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the resurrection they neither marry, 
nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. But as 
touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken 
unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. And when 
the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine. But when the 
Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were 
gathered together. Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, 
tempting him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the law? 
Jesus said unto him, thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great 
commandment. And the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbor as 
thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. While 

--- PAGE 3 ---
the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, Saying, what think ye of 
Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, the son of David. He saith unto 
them, how then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto 
my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool? If 
David then call him Lord, how is he his son? And no man was able to answer 
him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more 
questions. Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, saying: The 
scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat: All therefore whatsoever they bid 
you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, 
and do not. For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay 
them on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of 
their fingers. But all their works they do for to be seen of men: They make 
broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the 
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings 
in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But be not ye called 
Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren. And call no 
man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven. 
Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, even Christ. But he that is 
greatest among you shall be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself 
shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted. But woe unto 
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven 
against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are 
entering to go in. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye 
devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall 
receive the greater damnation. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! 
for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye 
make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves. Woe unto you, ye 
blind guides, which say, whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but 
whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor! Ye fools and 
blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold? 
And, whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth 
by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, 
the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? Whoso therefore shall swear by the 
altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon. And whoso shall swear by the 
temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth therein. And he that shall swear 
by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye pay tithe of mint and 
anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, 
judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the 

--- PAGE 4 ---
other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. Woe 
unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye make clean the outside of 
the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess. Thou 
blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, that the 
outside of them may be clean also. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, 
hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful 
outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness. Even 
so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of 
hypocrisy and iniquity. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! 
because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the 
righteous, and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have 
been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets. Wherefore ye be 
witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the 
prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation 
of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Wherefore, behold, I send 
unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill 
and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and 
persecute them from city to city: That upon you may come all the righteous 
blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of 
Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. 
Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation. O 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are 
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as 
a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your 
house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, ye shall not see me 
henceforth, till ye shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 
 Psalm 50, Then: “O God save thy people ...,” Lord have mercy (12 times): 
The small litany, and the Kontakion of the day, in Tone II: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end; * and recall with fear how the fig 
tree was hewn down. * Work diligently, O wretched one, with the talent that 
hath been granted thee, * be vigilant and cry aloud: ** May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ. 
Ikos: Why art thou melancholic, O my wretched soul? Why dost thou waste 
thy days consumed by unprofitable cares? Why art thou cumbered about much 
with things fleeting? The very last hour approacheth and we shall soon be 
parted from this vale of tears. While time doth remain, return to soberness and 
cry: I have sinned against Thee, O my Savior, cut me not down like the 

--- PAGE 5 ---
unfruitful fig tree; but since Thou art compassionate and exceedingly good, O 
Christ, be merciful to me who in fear calleth upon Thee: May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ! 
SYNAXARION READING 
Verse: Holy and Great Tuesday bringeth us ten Virgins. 
Verse: Who win a victory from the impartial Master.  
On Holy and Great Tuesday, we commemorate the parable of the ten 
virgins, because the Lord related this parable to His disciples as He was going 
toward Jerusalem to His Holy Passion. He told the parable of the ten virgins to 
call attention to almsgiving, at the same time teaching that every man must be 
ready before the end comes. He had spoken many times to them about chastity. 
Virginity is held in great honor, because it is indeed a great thing. Yet, lest 
anyone, while practicing this one virtue, neglect the others, and particularly love, 
by which the lamp of virginity is given light, he will be put to shame by the 
Lord. The Holy Gospel introduces this parable, calling five of the virgins wise, 
because they represent readiness to practice both love and virginity, and five of 
them foolish because, though they had virginity, they did not have love 
commensurate with it. They are foolish, therefore, because they practiced a 
great virtue yet neglected one that is easier and were reckoned as being no 
better than harlots; the latter were defeated by bodily pleasures, whereas the 
former, by possessions. As the night of the present life was going by, all the 
virgins fell asleep, that is, they died, for death is called a sleep. While they were 
sleeping, a cry rang out in the middle of the night, “Behold, the Bridegroom is 
coming; go out to meet Him!” (Matt. 25:6). Those who had their oil ready and 
lamps trimmed went inside to the Bridegroom when the doors were opened. 
Earlier, the others, who had insufficient oil after their sleep, had asked the first 
for oil. The wise virgins wished to give them some, but could not. Before they 
went inside, they replied, “No, lest there should not be enough for us and you; 
but go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves” (Matt. 25:9). While they 
went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with 
Him to the wedding, and the door was shut (See Matt. 25:10). The foolish 
virgins knocked on the doors and called out, “Lord, Lord, open to us” (Matt. 
25:11). But the Lord Himself uttered the terrible reply: “Assuredly, I say to you, 
I do not know you” (Matt. 25:12). For how can you see the Bridegroom if you 
lack the dowry of mercy? On account of this depiction, the parable of the ten 
virgins was given its place here by our God-bearing Fathers to teach us always 
to be watchful and ready to meet the true Bridegroom with good works, 

--- PAGE 6 ---
especially almsgiving, because the day and hour of the end are unknown to us. 
Therefore, it is made quite clear that after death, correction of mistakes and 
wicked acts shall be impossible, a teaching which is also found in the parable of 
the rich man and Lazarus the beggar. (See Luke 16:19-31) In the same way, we 
are taught by the All-comely Joseph to practice chastity and by the fig tree to 
produce spiritual fruit at all times. He who practices one virtue - and a great one 
indeed - but neglects the others, especially love, does not enter into eternal life 
with Christ but is turned back and is put to shame. There is nothing sadder and 
more shameful than to see virginity set at naught by possessions.  
O Christ our Bridegroom, unite us with the wise virgins and join us to Thy 
chosen flock, and have mercy on us and save us. Amen.  
Then followeth the Two-canticled Canon by Kosmas. In each ODE the 
Irmos is sung twice, and the Troparia are repeated 4 or 6 times so as to make up 
the number 12. The Irmos is sung at the end of each ODE as Katavasia. Before 
the Troparia we say: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The canon, in Tone II: 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: The three holy children were not obedient * to the decree of the 
tyrant; * and cast into the furnace they confessed God, singing: * O all ye 
Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Let us cast far from us slothfulness, and with brightly shining lamps meet 
Christ the immortal Bridegroom with hymns, crying: “O all ye works of the 
Lord, bless ye the Lord.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
May there be a sufficiency of the oil of fellowship in the vessels of our soul, 
that we need not purchase any at the time of the reward, as we sing: “O all ye 
works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord.” 
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord. 
Ye have all received an equal talent of grace from God; cultivate it, with the 
help of Christ who hath given it unto you, and sing: “O all ye Works of the 
Lord, bless ye the Lord.” 
Both now ..., Ye have all received an equal talent ..., 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, singing and exalting him 
throughout all ages! 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Katavasia: The three holy children were not obedient * to the decree of 
the tyrant; * and cast into the furnace they confessed God, singing: * O 
all ye Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. 
(The Magnificat is not chanted) 
ODE IX:  
Irmos: Thou didst contain within thy Womb * the God whom nothing 
can contain, * and hast brought forth joy to the world, * wherefore we 
sing thy praises, * O Virgin Theotokos. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
“Watch”, didst Thou say unto Thy disciples, O good One. “For ye know 
not what hour the Lord shall come to give every man his due reward.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., At Thy fearful second coming, O Master, number me 
with the sheep on Thy right hand, overlooking the multitude of my sins. 
Katavasia: Thou didst contain within thy Womb * the God whom 
nothing can contain, * and hast brought forth joy to the world, * 
wherefore we sing thy praises, * O Virgin Theotokos. 
Prostration to the ground. 
The Small Litany, followed by the Exapostilarion:  
Sung slowly with compunction; in Tone III: 
I behold Thy bridal chamber all-adorned, * O my Savior, * yet I have no 
wedding garment that I may enter therein. * make Thou the robe of my soul 
radiant, * O Giver of Light, ** and save me. (Thrice) 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera in Tone I: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
Into the splendor of Thy saints * how shall I who am unworthy enter? * For 
if I dare to draw nigh unto the bridal chamber, * my vesture betrayeth me, for it 
is not a wedding garment; * and I shall be bound and cast out by the angels. * 
Cleanse, O Lord, the filth from my soul ** and save me as Thou art the Lover 
of mankind. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Repeat: Into the splendor of Thy saints ..., 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
Tone II: I slumber in slothfulness of soul, * O Bridegroom Christ I have not 
a lamp aflame with the virtues, * and like the foolish virgins I have wandered 
off when it hath been time for action. * Close not the depths of thy compassion 
against me, O Master, * but dispel the darkness of sleep from me, and awaken 
me, * and lead me with the wise virgins into Thy bridal chamber, * where those 
who unceasingly keep festival, sing with pure voices: ** O Lord, glory be to 
Thee. 
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Repeat: I slumber in slothfulness of soul ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Thou hast heard the condemnation of him * who hid his talent, * O soul, 
hide not the word of God, * rather, proclaim His wonders, * that the gifts of 
grace entrusted to thee may multiply, ** and thou shalt enter into the joy of thy 
Lord. 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown forth the light. 
The Small Doxology is read. 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone VI: 
Come, ye faithful, and let us eagerly serve the Master, * for He giveth riches 
unto His servants. * To each according to the measure received, * let him 
increase his talent of grace. * Let one gain wisdom through good deeds; * let 
another liturgize with beauty; * let another share with preaching the mysteries to 
the unlearned faithful; * let another distribute his wealth to the poor. * Thus let 
us multiply that which hath been entrusted to us, * that as faithful stewards of 
His grace * we may be deemed worthy of the Master’s joy. * O Christ God, 
bestow this joy upon us, ** since Thou lovest mankind. 
Verse: We were filled in the morning with Thy mercy, O Lord, and we 
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad for the days wherein 
Thou didst humble us, for the years wherein we saw evils. And look 
upon Thy servants, and upon Thy works, * and do Thou guide their 
sons. 
When Thou shalt come, O Jesus, * in glory with the angelic hosts * and shalt 
sit upon the throne of judgment, * cast me not away from Thy presence, O 

--- PAGE 9 ---
good Shepherd. * For thou dost accept those who stand on the right, * but dost 
reject those on the left, * who have turned away from Thee. * Destroy me not 
with the goats, * though I am deadened in sin, * but number me with the sheep 
on Thy right hand, * and save me ** since Thou lovest mankind. 
Verse: And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and the 
works of our hand do Thou guide aright upon us, * yea, the works of our 
hands do Thou guide aright. 
O Bridegroom, surpassing all mankind in comeliness, * Thou hast called us 
to the spiritual feast of Thy bridal chamber. * Through participation in Thy 
sufferings; * take from me the disfigurement of sin, * and clothe me in the 
glorious robe of Thy comeliness, * and insofar as Thou art compassionate ** 
grant me to feast with Thee in Thy Kingdom. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
Behold O my soul the Master hath entrusted thee with a talent. * Receive 
the gift with fear; * that it gain interest for Him Who hath given it to thee; * 
distribute to the needy, * and make thyself a friend of the Lord, * and thus shalt 
thou stand on His right hand * when He cometh in glory, * thou shalt hear His 
blessed words: * “Enter, my faithful servant, into the joy of thy Lord.” * of this 
O Savior do Thou deem me worthy, * who have gone astray ** for the sake of 
Thine exceedingly great mercy. 
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then: 
Reader: Amen. Standing in the temple of thy glory as though seemingly in 
heaven; O Theotokos thou gate of heaven, open the door of thy compassion. 
Lord have mercy. (40 Times)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen.  
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord, father (master) bless. 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Then the reader immediately beginneth the first hour, including the Lenten 
verses, and the usual prostrations. 
After Our Father ..., we say the Kontakion of the day: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end; * and recall with fear how the fig 
tree was hewn down. * Work diligently, O wretched one, with the talent that 
hath been granted thee; * be vigilant and cry aloud: ** May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ. 
Note: The following is repeated for convenience: 
 On the first three days of Holy Week, the Psalter is read at the Third and 
Sixth Hours, but not at the First and the Ninth, as follows: 
 
Day 
3rd Hour 
6th Hour 
Monday 
VII 
VIII 
Tuesday 
XII 
XIII 
Wednesday 
XIX 
XX 
 
On these three days We read the four Gospels, as follows: 
At the Third Hour, after the usual psalms and the appointed chanting of the 
Psalter we chant the Lenten Troparion: O Lord, Who at the third hour ..., with 
three prostrations as usual. Then we say: O Theotokos, thou art the true vine ..., 
Meanwhile the priest, wearing a dark (black) Phelonion, opens the Royal Doors 
and brings the Gospel Book to the centre of the church, placing it on an 

--- PAGE 11 ---
Analogion; and one or more processional candlesticks With lighted candles are 
set beside it. The priest then censes the Book of the Gospels, and the Whole church and 
people; and the Gospel is read by the Priest as shown below. At the end of the 
Gospel reading, we continue with the Third Hour, saying: Blessed be the Lord 
God..., and the rest, with the usual bows and prostrations.  
After Our Father ..., we say the Kontakion of the day: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end; * and recall with fear how the fig 
tree was hewn down. * Work diligently, O wretched one, with the talent that 
hath been granted thee; * be vigilant and cry aloud: ** May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ. 
The four Gospels are read at the hours in various ways, but the following is 
the most common practice:  
 
Day 
3rd Hour 
6th Hour 
9th Hour 
Monday 
Matthew 1-14 
Matthew 15-28 
Mark 1-8 
Tuesday 
Mark 9-16 
Luke 1-8 
Luke 9-16 
Wednesday 
Luke 17-24 
John 1-6 
John 7-13:32 
 
At the end of the chanting of the hours on each day, the Gospel Book is 
brought back into the Altar, proceeded by processional candles, and the Royal 
Doors are closed, and the Typica is read. 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY 
SIXTH HOUR 
After the Third Hour, we at once begin the Sixth Hour, saying: O come, let 
us Worship ..., and the usual psalms, followed by the appointed chanting of the 
Psalter and the Troparion: O Thou who on the sixth day and hour ..., with three 
prostrations; and We say the Theotokion: We have no boldness on account ..., 
Then the Troparion of the prophecy: 
Troparion of the prophecy, in Tone I: 
To those who sin without measure, * grant plenteous forgiveness, O Savior. 
and grant that uncondemned * we may venerate Thy holy Resurrection, * by the 
intercessions of Thy most pure Mother, ** O Thou Who art plenteous in 
mercy. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., The foregoing is repeated. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: For with the Lord there is mercy, * and with Him is 
plenteous redemption. 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord, hear my voice. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF EZEKIAL (1:21 - 28) 
When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and when 
those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them: 
for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels. And the likeness of the 
firmament upon the heads of the living creature was as the color of the terrible 
crystal, stretched forth over their heads above. And under the firmament were 
their wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which 
covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their 
bodies. And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of 
great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of 
an host: when they stood, they let down their wings. And there was a voice 
from the firmament that was over their heads, when they stood, and had let 
down their wings. And above the firmament that was over their heads was the 
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the 
likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon 
it. And I saw as the color of amber, as the appearance of fire round about 
within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the 
appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, 

--- PAGE 13 ---
and it had brightness round about. As the appearance of the bow that is in the 
cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. 
This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Let Israel hope in the Lord, * from henceforth and for 
evermore. 
Verse: Lord, my heart is not exalted, nor are mine eyes lofty. 
 
Note: At The Sixth Hour, during the reading of the prophecy, the priest 
censeth the Book of the Gospels, but not the church and people. Then, following the 
second Prokeimenon, and the reading of the Gospel is completed, we say: Let 
Thy tender mercies, O Lord, speedily go before us..., and the rest of the Sixth 
Hour With the usual bows and prostrations. After Our Father ...,  
Kontakion of the day: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end; * and recall with fear how the fig 
tree was hewn down. * Work diligently, O wretched one, with the talent that 
hath been granted thee; * be vigilant and cry aloud: ** May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ. 
Note: At the Ninth Hour there is no appointed chanting of the Psalter, but 
after the usual three Psalms We say: O Thou who at the ninth hour ..., with 
three prostrations, followed by: O loving Lord, who for our sakes ..., Before the 
Gospel reading, the priest censeth the Gospel Book, the church and the people, 
as at the Third Hour. After the Gospel Reading We say: Deliver us not up 
utterly unto the end ..., and the rest of the Hour with the usual bows and 
prostrations. After Our Father ..., the Kontakion: 
Kontakion of the day, in Tone II: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end ..., 
 
At the completion of the 9th Hour, we read the Typica, quickly as follows: 
In Thy kingdom remember us, O Lord, * when Thou comest in Thy 
kingdom. 
Blessed are the poor in spirit, * for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  
Blessed are they that mourn, * for they shall be comforted.  
Blessed are the meek, * for they shall inherit the earth.  

--- PAGE 14 ---
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, * for they shall be 
filled.  
Blessed are the merciful, * for they shall obtain mercy.  
Blessed are the pure in heart, * for they shall see God.  
Blessed are the peacemakers, * for they shall be called the sons of God.  
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, * for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven.  
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, * and shall say 
all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.  
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, * for great is your reward in the heavens. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom! 
Remember us, O Master, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom! 
Remember us, O Holy One, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom! 
The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of 
Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory! 
Verse: Come unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be 
ashamed. 
The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of 
Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory! 
 
Glory ...,  
The choir of the holy angels and archangels, with all the heavenly hosts, 
doth hymn Thee and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! Heaven and 
earth are full of Thy glory! 
Both now ..., 
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, * Maker of heaven and earth and 
of all things visible and invisible. * And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of 
God, * the Only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages; * Light of 
Light, true God of true God; * begotten, not made; of one essence with the 
Father, by Whom all things were made; * Who for us men and for our salvation 
came down from the heavens, * and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the 
Virgin Mary, and became man; * And was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, 
* and suffered and was buried; * And arose again on the third day according to 
the Scriptures; * And ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of 

--- PAGE 15 ---
the Father; * And shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living and the 
dead; * Whose kingdom shall have no end. * And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, 
the Giver of life; Who proceedeth from the Father; * Who with the Father and 
the Son together is worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. * In 
One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church. * I confess one baptism for the 
remission of sins. * I look for the resurrection of the dead, * and the life of the 
age to come. Amen.  
Then, the prayer: 
Remit, pardon, forgive, O God, our offenses, both voluntary and 
involuntary, in deed and word, in knowledge and ignorance, by day and by 
night, in mind and thought; forgive us all things, for Thou art good and the 
Lover of mankind. 
Our Father, Who art in the Heavens, hallowed be Thy name, Thy kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily 
bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against 
us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil-one. 
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom .., 
After which the Kontakion of the day: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end; * and recall with fear how the fig 
tree was hewn down. * Work diligently, O wretched one, with the talent that 
hath been granted thee; * be vigilant and cry aloud: ** May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ. 
Lord, have mercy! (40 times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father (Master), Bless. 
Priest: God be gracious unto us and bless us ..., 
Reader: Amen. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 

--- PAGE 16 ---
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Reader: Amen. Holy God ..., Our Father ...,  
Priest: For Thine is the kingdom .., 
Reader: Lord, have mercy! (12 times) 
O Most Holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, 
and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make 
steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every 
defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One 
is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of the God the Father. Amen. 
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: May Christ our true God, the Lord Who for our salvation went to 
His voluntary Passion ..., 
Choir: Amen. Lord, have mercy. (Thrice). 
Typica is followed by Vespers and the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts. 
 
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY  
AT VESPERS 
On “Lord, I have cried ...,” 10 Stichera, in the Tone indicated: 
Verse: Bring my soul out of prison * that I may confess Thy name.  
Tone I: Into the splendor of Thy saints * how shall I who am unworthy 
enter? * For if I dare to draw nigh unto the bridal chamber, * my vesture 
betrayeth me, for it is not a wedding garment; * and I shall be bound and cast 
out by the angels. * Cleanse, O Lord, the filth from my soul ** and save me 
since Thou lovest mankind. 
Verse: The righteous shall wait patiently for me * until Thou shalt reward 
me. 
Repeat: Into the splendor of Thy saints ..., 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Tone II: I slumber in slothfulness of soul, * O Bridegroom Christ I have not 
a lamp aflame with the virtues, * and like the foolish virgins I have wandered 
off when it is time to for action. * Close not the depths of thy compassion 
against me, O Master, * but dispel the darkness of sleep from me, and awaken 
me, * and lead me with the Wise virgins into Thy bridal chamber, * where those 
who unceasingly keep festival sing with pure voices: * “O Lord, glory be to 
Thee.” 
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Repeat: I slumber in slothfulness of soul ..., 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Tone IV: Thou hast heard the condemnation of him * who hid his talent, * 
O soul, hide not the word of God, * rather, proclaim His wonders, * that the 
gifts of grace entrusted to thee may multiply, ** and thou shalt enter into the joy 
of thy Lord. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
Repeat: Thou hast heard the condemnation of him ..., 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * 
let Israel hope in the Lord. 
Tone VI: Come, ye faithful, and let us eagerly serve the Master, * for He 
giveth riches unto His servants. * To each according to the measure received, * 
let him increase his talent of grace. * Let one gain wisdom through good deeds; 
* let another liturgize with beauty; * let another share with preaching the 
mysteries to the unlearned faithful; * let another distribute his wealth to the 
poor. * Thus let us multiply that which hath been entrusted to us, * that as 
faithful stewards of His grace * we may be deemed worthy of the Master’s joy. * 
O Christ God do Thou bestow this joy upon us, ** since Thou lovest mankind. 
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Repeat: Come, ye faithful, and let us eagerly serve the Master ..., 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples.  
Tone VI: When Thou shalt come, O Jesus, * in glory with the angelic hosts 
* and shalt sit upon the throne of judgment, * cast me not away from Thy 
presence, O good Shepherd. * For thou dost accept those who stand on the 
right, * but reject those on the left, * who have turned away from Thee. * 
Destroy me not with the goats, * though I am deadened in sin, * but number 
me with the sheep on Thy right hand, * and save me ** since Thou lovest 
mankind. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Tone VI: O Bridegroom, surpassing all mankind in comeliness, * Thou hast 
called us to the spiritual feast of Thy bridal chamber. * Through participation in 
Thy sufferings, * take from me the disfigurement of sin; * and clothe me in the 
glorious robe of Thy comeliness, * and since Thou art compassionate ** grant 
me to feast with Thee in Thy Kingdom. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: 
Behold O my soul the Master hath entrusted thee with a talent. * Receive 
the gift with fear; * that it gain interest for Him Who hath given it to Thee; * 
distribute to the needy, * and make thyself a friend of the Lord, * and thus shalt 
thou stand on His right hand * when He cometh in glory, * and hear His 
blessed words: * “Enter, my faithful servant, into the joy of thy Lord.” * of this 
O Savior do Thou deem me worthy, * who have gone astray ** for the sake of 
Thy great mercy. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Entrance with the Gospel: “O joyous Light ...,” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest: * Thou and the Ark of Thy 
holiness.  
Verse: Remember O Lord, David and all his meekness. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF EXODUS (2: 5-10) 
And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and 
her maidens walked along by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark among 
the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. And when she had opened it, she saw the 
child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, 
This is one of the Hebrews’ children. Then said his sister to Pharaoh’s daughter, 
Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the 
child for thee? And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and 
called the child’s mother. And Pharaoh’s daughter said unto her, Take this child 
away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the women took 
the child, and nursed it. And the child grew, and she brought him unto 
Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: 
and she said, because I drew him out of the water. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: Behold now, what is so good or so joyous * as for 
brethren to dwell together in unity? 
Verse: It is like the oil of myrrh upon the head, which runneth down 
upon the beard, upon the beard of Aaron. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF JOB (1: 13-22) 
And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and 
drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house: And there came a messenger unto 
Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside them: And 
the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they have slain the 
servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, the fire of God is 
fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, and 
consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. While he was yet 
speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans made out three 
bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain the 
servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy 
daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house: And, 
behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four 
corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead; and I 
only am escaped alone to tell thee. Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and 
shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, and said, 
Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither: the 
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. In 
all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. 
Choir: Let my prayer be set forth ..., Then the Gospel reading: 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST MATTHEW (24:36 - 26:2) 
The Lord said unto His disciples: of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, 
not the angels of heaven, but my Father only. But as the days of Noah were, so 
shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were before 
the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until 
the day that Noe entered into the ark, And knew not until the flood came, and 
took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Then shall 
two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left. Two women shall 
be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left. Watch 
therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. But know this, that 
if the good-man of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, 
he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken 
up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of 
man cometh. Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made 
ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that 
servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say unto 
you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods. But and if that evil servant 
shall say in his heart, my lord delayeth his coming; And shall begin to smite his 
fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; The lord of that servant 
shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not 
aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the 
hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the 
kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and 
went forth to meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were 
foolish. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: But 
the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. While the bridegroom tarried, 

--- PAGE 21 ---
they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made, behold, the 
bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and 
trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, give us of your oil; for 
our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, not so; lest there be not 
enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for 
yourselves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that 
were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward 
came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered 
and said, verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know 
neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh. For the kingdom 
of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country, who called his own servants, 
and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five talents, to 
another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability; 
and straightway took his journey. Then he that had received the five talents 
went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents. And likewise 
he that had received two, he also gained other two. But he that had received one 
went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord’s money. After a long time the 
lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them. And so he that had 
received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou 
deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents 
more. His lord said unto him, well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou 
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: 
enter thou into the joy of thy lord. He also that had received two talents came 
and said, lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two 
other talents beside them. His lord said unto him, well done, good and faithful 
servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord. Then he which had received 
the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, 
reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed: 
And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast 
that is thine. His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful 
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have 
not strawed: Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, 
and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury. Take 
therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. For 
unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from 
him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the 

--- PAGE 22 ---
unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with 
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: And before him shall be 
gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd 
divideth his sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, 
but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, 
Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was 
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and 
ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto 
me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an 
hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a 
stranger, and took thee in? Or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee 
sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say unto 
them, verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of 
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say also unto them 
on the left hand, depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for 
the devil and his angels: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was 
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: 
Naked, and ye clothed me not: Sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then 
shall they also answer him, saying, lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or 
athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto 
thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye 
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go 
away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal. And it 
came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto his 
disciples, ye know that after two days is the feast of the Passover, and the Son 
of man is betrayed to be crucified. 
And the rest of the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts 
 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Note: If the Presanctified Liturgy is not served, Vespers is chanted as follows: 
At (Lord I have cried ...,) 6 Stichera: 
in Tone I: Into the splendor of Thy saints..., (Twice) 
in Tone II: I slumber in slothfulness of soul..., (Twice) 
in Tone IV: Thou hast heard the condemnation of him..., (Twice) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: Come, ye faithful, and let us eagerly serve 
the Master ..., 
The Entrance with the Gospel: O Joyous Light ..., 
Then the Prokeimenon, and the Old Testament Lessons, and straightway the 
Gospel reading. 
Then: Vouchsafe O Lord ...,  
The litany: Let us complete our evening prayer ...,  
On the Aposticha, these Stichera in Tone II: 
When Thou shalt come, O Jesus ..., 
Verse: Unto Thee O Lord have I lifted up mine eyes ..., 
When Thou shalt come, O Jesus ..., 
Verse: Have mercy upon me ..., 
O Bridegroom, surpassing all mankind in beauty..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VII: Behold O my soul the Master hath 
entrusted thee ..., 
Then the usual Lenten Vesperal ending as follows: 
“Now lettest Thou Thy servant ...,” Trisagion through Our Father ..., Then:  
In Tone V: 
O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice, O Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with 
thee; blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb, for 
thou hast borne the Savior of our souls. (Prostration) 
Glory ...,  
O Baptist of Christ, be mindful of us all, that we may be delivered from our 
iniquities, for unto thee is given the grace to pray on behalf of us all. 
(Prostration) 
Both now ..., 
Pray for us, holy apostles and all ye saints, that we may be delivered from 
perils and afflictions: for ye are our fervent supplicants before the Savior. 
(Prostration) 

--- PAGE 24 ---
We take refuge beneath thy tender mercy O Theotokos: despise not our 
supplications in distress: but deliver us from perils, for thou alone art pure and 
blessed. (no Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (40 Times) 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
More honorable than the cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the word, the 
very Theotokos thee do we magnify.  
In the name of the Lord father (master) bless!  
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Reader: Amen. O Heavenly King, strengthen Orthodox Christians, establish 
the Faith, subdue the nations, give peace to the world, keep well this city (or 
habitation, or town); settle our departed fathers and brethren in the tabernacles 
of the righteous, and receive us in penitence and confession, for Thou art good 
and the Lover of mankind. 
Then the Prayer of St Ephraim: 
Priest: O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, 
ambition, and idle talking give me not. (Prostration) 
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love 
bestow upon me Thy servant. (Prostration) 
Yea, O Lord King, grant me to see my own failings and not condemn my 
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
O God, cleanse me a sinner. (Twelve times) 
O Lord and Master of my life, a spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, 
and idle talking give me not. But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, 
patience, and love bestow upon me Thy servant. Yea, O Lord King, grant me to 
see my own failings and not condemn my brother; for blessed art Thou unto 
the ages of ages. Amen. (Prostration) 
Lord Have Mercy (12 Times) 
O All-Holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, 
and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make 
steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every 
defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One 
is Holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, Amen. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Choir: Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and 
forevermore. (Thrice) 
Psalm 33 
I will bless the Lord at all times, * His praise shall continually be in my 
mouth. *In the Lord shall my soul be praised; * let the meek hear and be glad.  
O magnify the Lord with me, * and let us exalt His name together. * I 
sought the Lord, and He heard me, * and delivered me from all my tribulations.  
Come unto Him, and be enlightened, * and your faces shall not be ashamed. 
* This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, * and saved him out of all his 
tribulations.  
The angel of the Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, * and 
will deliver them. * O taste and see that the Lord is good; * blessed is the man 
that hopeth in Him.  
O fear the Lord, all ye His saints; * for there is no want to them that fear 
Him. * Rich men have turned poor and gone hungry; * but they that seek the 
Lord shall not be deprived of any good thing.  
Come ye children, hearken unto me; * I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 
* What man is there that desireth life, * who loveth to see good days? 
Keep thy tongue from evil, * and thy lips from speaking guile. * Turn away 
from evil, and do good; * seek peace, and pursue it.  
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, * and His ears are opened unto 
their supplication. * The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, * utterly 
to destroy the remembrance of them from the earth.  
The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, * and He delivered them out 
of all their tribulations. * The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite 
heart, * and He will save the humble of spirit. *  
Many are the tribulations of the righteous, * and the Lord shall deliver them 
out of them all. * The Lord keepeth all their bones, * not one of them shall be 
broken.  
The death of sinners is evil, * and they that hate the righteous shall do 
wrong. * The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants, * and none of them 
will do wrong that hope in Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  

--- PAGE 26 ---
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
Priest: (The dismissal) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
GREAT COMPLINE 
HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY EVENING 
Priest: Blessed is our God...,  
Reader: Amen. Glory to Thee our God ..., Heavenly King ..., Holy God 
..., Our Father ..., 
Priest: For thine is the kingdom ...,  
Reader: Lord Have Mercy (12 times)... Glory ..., Both now ..., O come let 
us worship ..., The rest of Great Compline up to the Small Doxology, 
After the Small Doxology we chant the following three-canticled canon 
by St. Andrew of Crete. The Irmoi are sung twice. Before each of the 
Troparia we say: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee .., in Tone III 
ODE III 
Irmos: My mind hath not brought forth good fruit, * but do Thou show 
me to be fruitful * in Thy compassion O God, * Thou husbandman of all 
good things. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
It is the time of the end: let us turn back, for Christ teacheth us that He shall 
come in the twinkling of an eye and shall not tarry, to judge His world.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
To illustrate the suddenness of His Coming, Christ spoke of the unforeseen 
destruction that overwhelmed the earth in the days of Noah. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The bridal chamber is open; the divine feast hath been prepared within; the 
Bridegroom is there and beckons all, let us therefore prepare ourselves. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The house of Simon contained Thee whom nothing can contain, O Jesus 
our King, and the sinful woman anointed Thee with oil. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The woman was filled with a mystical fragrance, and delivered from the 
foulness of her many former sins, O Savior: for from Thee floweth the myrrh 
of life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Though Thou Thyself art the heavenly food and life of those who hunger, 
O Christ, Thou didst eat with mortal men thereby revealing Thy self-abasement, 

--- PAGE 28 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The ungrateful disciple rejected Thee, O Christ; and taking the whole band 
of lawless men, he betrayed Thee and brought them to seize Thee. 
Glory ..., I worship Thee, O Son, with the Father and the Spirit of 
righteousness, and praise the one Nature, distinguished in Persons but united in 
Essence. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: The Ewe-lamb that hath given birth to Thee the 
lamb and shepherd, O Jesus my God, ever intercedeth on behalf of all those 
who put their trust in Thee. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone V: 
Lo, the evil council hath gathered in hatred * to condemn the Lord who 
sitteth on high as Judge of all. * They gather together with Herod and Pilate, * 
Ananias and Caiaphas, ** to judge Him who alone is longsuffering. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * unto 
Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless and 
supremely exult throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Not unknowing of the time of our end, He who watcheth over all the ages 
hath said that He knew not that day; thus setting a bound on what can be 
known, that we be humble-minded. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
When Thou sittest in judgment, like a shepherd dividing the sheep from the 
goats, O Savior, deprive us not of a place at Thy blessed right hand. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O Christ, Thou art our Pascha, sacrificed on behalf of all, as both Lamb and 
Victim; for the forgiveness of our sins; wherefore we supremely exalt Thy 
divine Passion throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
All thy life is like a mill, a field, and a house, O my soul, therefore acquire a 
heart ready for God, that the corruption of the flesh may not hold thee back. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Not only with Pharisees, nor only with Simon, O Savior wast Thou pleased 
to enter and eat; but the publicans and harlots also partook of Thy compassion. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 

--- PAGE 29 ---
In his love for money the traitor Judas, seeing the ointment poured forth, 
was troubled, as also he was about the manner by which he might sell the 
Master; and going unto wicked men he agreed on a price with them. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O the blessed hands, O the blessed hair and lips of the chaste harlot! For 
with them, O Savior, she hath poured out the ointment on Thy feet wiping 
them, and copiously kissing them. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
O Word, a woman came to Thee at supper, and weeping at Thy feet, she 
took the alabaster box and poured myrrh upon the head of Thee, who art the 
Myrrh of immortality. 
Refrain: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, the Lord. 
With the Father we glorify the Son and the Holy Spirit, the Holy Trinity one 
in Godhead, and we cry aloud: Holy, holy, holy art Thou throughout the ages. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: By the prayers O Savior, of Thy most pure 
Mother and of Thine apostles, send down Thine abundant mercy upon us and 
grant peace to Thy people. 
We praise, bless and worship the Lord ..., 
Katavasia: Unto Him Who of old prefigured the miracle of the Virgin, * 
unto Moses in the burning-bush * on Mount Sinai, * let us sing, bless 
and supremely exult throughout all ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: In a manner surpassing nature, * the Word who timelessly shone 
forth from the Father, * hath been conceived within a womb, * according 
to the flesh, * O ye faithful with never silent hymns let us magnify Him. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
It is the time to take action, for the purpose of salvation; take thy talent, the 
image that was given thee of old, O my soul, and gain eternal life. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Let us adorn our souls like shining lamps, that when the Bridegroom 
cometh, He may let us enter with Him into the eternal marriage banquet, before 
the door is shut. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Wishing to show Thine extreme humility unto all, O Jesus, Thou who art 
the bread of those who hunger, didst eat in the house of Simon.  

--- PAGE 30 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou who art the life-giving bread, didst eat with Simon the Pharisee, O 
Jesus, that the harlot might gain Thy priceless grace, through the pouring of the 
ointment upon Thy head. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
 “My hands are filthy and I have the lips of a harlot; my life is impure and 
my body corrupt; but do Thou release and forgive me”, cried the harlot unto 
Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The woman drew near to Thy feet, O Savior, and poured upon them 
fragrant ointment; and was thereby filled with the myrrh of forgiveness. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
 “Rich in sweet scents, yet meager in virtues, I offer Thee what I have: grant 
me in return that which Thou hast, and release and forgive me”, cried the harlot 
to Christ. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
 “My myrrh is corruptible, Thine is the myrrh of life, for Thy Name myrrh 
is poured forth upon those who are worthy of remission. Do Thou release and 
forgive me”, cried the harlot to Christ. 
Glory ..., Thou art beginningless O Father, and Thou O Son art Uncreated, 
co-enthroned art Thou O Spirit, Three in one Essence, and three Hypostases in 
one true God.  
 Both now ..., Theotokion: O Theotokos, thou art our ever present hope, 
cease not to beseech Him who was born of thee, to deliver from all perils, and 
from every temptation, those who honor thee. 
Katavasia: In a manner surpassing nature, * the Word who timelessly 
shone forth from the Father, * hath been conceived within a womb, * 
according to the flesh, * O ye faithful with never silent hymns let us 
magnify Him. 
We make a full prostration, and Continue with the Trisagion ..., through 
..., Our Father ..., Then the Kontakion of the day, in Tone II: 
Think, O soul, upon the hour of thine end; * and recall with fear how the fig 
tree was hewn down. * Work diligently, O wretched one, with the talent that 
hath been granted thee; * be vigilant and cry aloud: ** May we not be left 
outside the bridal chamber of Christ. 
And the rest of Great Compline.  
 
