--- PAGE 1 ---
HOLY AND GREAT THURSDAY  
AT MATINS 
About the seventh hour of the night (one o’clock in the morning) we 
begin Matins in the usual way. After the Six Psalms and the great Litany 
we chant Alleluia in Tone VIII, slowly and solemnly, with the appointed 
verses, and then the Troparion: 
Choir: Alleluia (Thrice) 
Verse: Out of the night my spirit waketh at dawn unto Thee, O God, for 
Thy commandments are light upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Zeal shall lay hold upon an uninstructed people. (Alleluia x3) 
Verse: Add more evils upon them, O Lord; add more evils upon them 
that are glorious upon the earth. (Alleluia x3) 
Then the Choir chanteth the Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
When The glorious disciples * were illumined at the Supper by the washing 
of their feet, * then the impious Judas * became darkened by the disease of 
avarice, * and he delivered Thee, the just judge, to lawless judges. * See, O lover 
of money, * how for money’s sake he hanged himself. * Flee from the insatiable 
greed which made him dare to do such things against his Master. * O Lord, 
who art good towards all mankind, glory be to Thee (Twice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated: 
Then followeth the Gospel reading: 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (22: 1-39) 
At that time, the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the 
Passover. And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him; for 
they feared the people. Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being 
of the number of the twelve. And he went his way, and communed with the 
chief priests and captains, how he might betray him unto them. And they were 
glad, and covenanted to give him money. And he promised, and sought 
opportunity to betray him unto them in the absence of the multitude. Then 
came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed. And he 
sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat. 
And they said unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare? And he said unto 
them, Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, 
bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he entereth in. And 

--- PAGE 2 ---
ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, The Master saith unto thee, Where 
is the guest-chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? And he 
shall shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready. And they went, 
and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover. And 
when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him. And 
he said unto them, With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you 
before I suffer: For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be 
fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and 
said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves: For I say unto you, I will not 
drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come. And he 
took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is 
my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also 
the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood, which 
is shed for you. But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on 
the table. And truly the Son of man goeth, as it was determined: but woe unto 
that man by whom he is betrayed! And they began to enquire among 
themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing. And there was also 
a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest. And he 
said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they 
that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors. But ye shall not be so: 
but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is 
chief, as he that doth serve. For whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he 
that serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he that 
serveth. Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. And I 
appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me; That ye 
may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath 
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, 
that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. 
And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and 
to death. And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before 
that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me. And he said unto them, When 
I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they 
said, Nothing. Then said he unto them, But now, he that hath a purse, let him 
take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him sell his 
garment, and buy one. For I say unto you, that this that is written must yet be 
accomplished in me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors: for the 

--- PAGE 3 ---
things concerning me have an end. And they said, Lord, behold, here are two 
swords. And he said unto them, It is enough. And he came out, and went, as he 
was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his disciples also followed him. 
Psalm 50, Then immediately we chant the Canon by Kosmas. In each 
ODE the Irmos is sung twice, and then the Troparia are repeated four or 
six times so as to make up the number twelve. The Irmos is sung at the 
end of each ODE as Katavasia. Before the Troparia we say: Glory to 
Thee our God, glory to Thee. 
The canon, in Tone VI: 
ODE I 
Irmos: The Red Sea was parted by a blow from the staff of Moses, * and 
the deep with its waves became dry, * becoming a path to the unarmed 
people of Israel, * but to the fully armed ones it became a grave. * A 
hymn of Praise well-pleasing to God was sung: * gloriously hath Christ 
our God been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
The Cause of all and the Bestower of life, the infinite Wisdom of God hath 
built His house from a pure Mother who hath not known a man. For clothing 
Himself in a bodily temple, Christ our God hath gloriously been glorified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Instructing His friends in the Mysteries, the true Wisdom of God prepareth 
a soul-nourishing table, mingling for the faithful the cup of the wine of eternal 
life. Let us approach with reverence and cry aloud: Christ our God hath 
gloriously been glorified. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Ye faithful, let us give ear to the exalted preaching of 
the uncreated and consubstantial Wisdom of God, for He crieth aloud: “O taste 
and see that I am good!” Wherefore sing ye: Christ our God hath gloriously 
been glorified. 
Katavasia: The Red Sea was parted by a blow ..., 
ODE III 
Irmos: O Lord Thou art the God and Creator of all, * becoming poor, 
Thou hast united Thyself * without passion to a creature, * and offered 
Thyself as a Passover * for those for whom Thou wast soon to die; * 
crying aloud: Eat ye My Body, * and ye shall be firmly established in the 
faith. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Thou didst offer Thyself in redemption for the race of mankind, O Good 
One, and with joy didst fill the cup, from whence Thy disciples drank, Thyself 
consecrating it, saying: “Drink ye My Blood, and ye shall be firmly established 
in the faith.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., “Foolish is the man who is a traitor in your midst!” in 
foresight didst Thou say to Thy disciples: “He will never know nor understand 
these mysteries. But abide ye in Me, and ye shall be firmly established in the 
faith.” 
Katavasia: O Lord Thou art the God and Creator of all ..., 
The Small Litany. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
He who hath made the lakes and springs and seas, * wishing to teach us the 
surpassing value of humility, * girded Himself with a towel and washed the feet 
of the disciples, * humbling Himself in the abundance of His great and loving-
kindness, * raising us up from the depths of wickedness, ** for He alone is the 
Lover of mankind. 
Glory ..., in Tone III: 
Humbling Thyself in Thy loving-kindness, * Thou didst wash the feet of 
Thy disciples, * teaching them to take the path which as God Thou hast 
followed. * Peter, who at first refused to have his feet washed, * then yielded to 
the divine command, * and earnestly entreated Thee ** that we may be granted 
Thy great mercy. 
 Both now ..., in Tone IV: 
Eating, O Master, with Thy disciples, * Thou didst mystically reveal Thine 
all-holy repose, * which delivereth from corruption, ** those who honor Thy 
sacred Passion. 
ODE IV 
Irmos: Foreseeing Thine ineffable mystery, O Christ, * the Prophet cried 
aloud: * “Thou hast manifested the power of  Thy love, O merciful 
Father, * for in Thy goodness * Thou hast sent Thine only-begotten Son 
* to cleanse the world from sin.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
O Christ, going to Thy Passion, which freeth all the descendants of Adam 
from the passions, Thou didst say to Thy friends: “I have desired to eat this 
Passover with you; for the Father hath sent Me, His only-begotten Son, to 
cleanse the world from sin.” 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Partaking from the cup, O Lord Immortal, Thou didst cry unto the 
disciples: “In this present life I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine with 
you, for the Father hath sent Me, His only-begotten Son, to cleanse the world 
from sin.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., “In My Kingdom”, Thou didst say to Thy friends, O 
Christ, “I shall drink a new drink, for as God among gods shall I be with you, 
for the Father hath sent Me, His only-begotten Son, to cleanse the world from 
sin.” 
Katavasia: Foreseeing Thine ineffable mystery ..., 
ODE V 
Irmos: Bound with the bond of love, * the apostles, having offered 
themselves to Christ, the Master of all, * had their comely feet 
cleansed by Him, * proclaiming peace unto all.  
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
The Wisdom of God that holdeth back the untamed fury of the waters 
above the firmament, and which doth bridle the deep, holding back the seas, 
now poureth water into a basin; and the Master washeth the feet of His 
servants. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., The Master hath shown His disciples an example of 
humility; For He who hath wrapped the heaven in clouds, hath girt Himself 
with a towel; and He in whose hand is the breath of life of all things, kneeleth 
down to wash the feet of His servants. 
Katavasia: Bound with the bond of love ..., 
ODE VI 
Irmos: The uttermost depths of sin have encompassed me; * and its 
stormy waves I can endure no more, * wherefore like Jonah I cry out to 
Thee, O Master: * Lead me up from corruption. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
“O disciples, ye call Me Lord and Master, and so I am”, didst Thou cry, O 
Savior. “Follow then the example that ye have seen in Me.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., “He who is free from defilement need not have his 
feet washed, O My disciples ye are clean, but not all of you. For one of you is 
inclined to madness.” 
Katavasia: The uttermost depths of sin ..., 

--- PAGE 6 ---
The small Litany 
Kontakion, in Tone II: 
The traitor taketh the Bread in his hands, * but stretcheth them out secretly 
to receive the price of Him * who hath fashioned mankind with His own hands. 
* For Judas, the slave and deceiver, ** remained unrepentant.  
Ikos: Let us all draw near to the mystical table in fear, and with pure souls 
receive the Bread, remaining with the Master, that we may see how He washed 
the feet of the disciples and wiped them with a towel; and let us do as we have 
seen, subjecting ourselves to each other, washing one another’s feet. For such is 
the commandment that Christ Himself gave to His disciples; but Judas, the 
slave and deceiver, listened not. 
SYNAXARION READING 
Verses to the feet washing: God, Whose feet trod in Eden of old, in the 
afternoon,  
 Washeth the feet of His disciples in the evening. 
Verses to the Mystical Supper: Twofold is the supper: for it is the 
Passover of the law,  
 And it is the New Pascha, the Body and Blood of the Master. 
Verses to the supernatural prayer: In Thy prayer O master, Thou didst 
show fear. 
 And in let great drops of blood fall from Thy face. 
 Ostensibly to avoid death, but thereby deceiving the enemy 
Verses to the betrayal: What need have ye of swords and staves, O ye 
deceivers of the people. 
 To put to death Him Who is zealous to redeem the world? 
On this day, Holy and Great Thursday, according to the order which our 
Holy Fathers inherited from the Holy Apostles, and the Holy Gospels, we 
celebrate four events: the Holy Washing of the Disciples’ feet, the Mystical 
Supper (the institution of the Holy Mystery of the Eucharist, which we 
celebrate to this day), the Lord’s Agony in the Garden, and His Betrayal. On the 
morrow, Friday, the Passover sacrifice of the Hebrews was intended to take 
place, namely the slaughter of the lamb reared for this purpose. On that same 
Friday, the Truth was intended to follow the old type. For it was intended that 
the true Passover would be sacrificed, the Lamb of God the Father, who takes 
away the sin of the world - our Lord Jesus Christ, who was prefigured by the 

--- PAGE 7 ---
paschal lamb which was sacrificed each year by the Hebrews. On the evening of 
this day - which was the day of unleavened bread, the eve of the Passover of the 
Old Law, March 22, the fifth day of the week - Jesus observed the Passover and 
dined in the city with the Twelve Disciples. The Lord did this on the evening of 
the fifth day (Thursday), since among the Hebrews the “night-day” reckoning 
begins with the evening of the present day and is called the evening of the 
following day. In other words, according to Jewish tradition “Friday evening” 
was that time period that began after sundown on Thursday. (For example: as in 
the Orthodox Church today, the “liturgical evening” of a feast day would be 
that time after Vespers.) Zebedee (the father of the Holy Apostles James and 
John) prepared the Passover, since he was the one who carried the earthenware 
jar of water, as St. Athanasius the Great says and others also say exceptional 
things about Zebedee. Afterwards, Jesus revealed more perfect and sublime 
teaching to His Disciples, and when night fully came, in the Upper Room He 
handed over the Mystery of our Passover. Thus, it is said that He reclined at 
supper with the Twelve. Notice that this was not the Passover of the Old Law, 
because He both reclined and gave a supper of bread and drink. Under the Old 
Law, the Jews stood, with girded loins and walking staffs in hand during the 
meal. There all things crumbled away through Fire, including the use of 
unleavened bread. Before He began to eat (thus says the divine Chrysostom), 
He rose from supper, laid aside His garments, and poured water into a basin in 
preparation for the Washing of the feet. He did these things both to shame 
Judas and to remind the other Disciples that it is not right to seek the first place. 
Similarly, after the washing, He exhorted them by saying that he who wishes to 
be first must be last of all, showing Himself as an example. It seems that Christ 
first of all washed Judas, who most presumptuously sat first in line, and last He 
came to Peter. Since Peter was more high-spirited than the others, he prevented 
the Teacher, but when at the same time he heard from the Lord that if Christ 
did not wash his feet he would have no part with the Lord, he yielded quite 
readily. So our Lord Jesus Christ washed the feet of the Disciples and showed a 
paradoxical exaltation through humility. He took His garments again and leaned 
back and exhorted and entreated them that they love one another and not seek 
the first place. While they were eating, He brought up the main point 
concerning His Betrayal. Since the Disciples were confused about His saying, 
Jesus said quietly to John alone, “It is he to whom I shall give a piece of bread 
when I have dipped it” (John 13:26). He spoke in this way because if Peter, 
being more high-spirited than the others, had known the truth, he would have 

--- PAGE 8 ---
taken it upon himself to strike a blow against Judas. Jesus said again, “He who 
dipped his hand with Me in the dish will betray Me” (Matt. 26:23). When both 
these events had occurred, after a little silence He took the bread and said, 
“Take, eat; this is My Body” (Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:22), and likewise the Cup, 
“Drink from it, all of you. For this is My Blood of the New Covenant, which is 
shed for many for the remission of sins” (Matt. 26:27-28; Mark 14:24). “Do this 
in memory of Me” (Luke 22:19). He performed these deeds and ate and drank 
with them. Notice that He calls His Body bread - not unleavened bread. So let 
those who offer the unleavened sacrifice be ashamed. After Judas tasted the 
bread, Satan entered into him, because when he first tempted him he already 
ruled over him completely. Then he withdrew and proceeded to the High 
Priests, in order that he might hand Christ over to them for thirty pieces of 
silver. After the Supper, the Lord went out with the Disciples to the Mount of 
Olives, to a certain place called Gethsemane. Then Jesus said to them, “All of 
you will be made to stumble because of Me this night, for it is written, I will 
strike the Shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered. But after I have been 
raised, I will go before you to Galilee” (Matt. 26:31-32; Mark 14:27). Peter said 
to Him, “Even if all are made to stumble, yet I will not be.” Jesus said to him, 
“Assuredly, I say to you that today, even this night, before the cock crows twice, 
you will deny Me three times” (Mark 14:28-30). He said “before the cock crows 
twice,” because customarily the cock crows not once but even two or three 
times, and accordingly it so happened. Immeasurable grief, signifying the 
weakness of human nature, overtook Peter because of this saying of the Lord. 
The Lord withdrew in order that this might take place - after He handed over 
the whole world to Himself - so that of Himself He might make known the 
fickleness of human nature and grant pardon to sinners. Nevertheless, on a 
higher level, the threefold denial of Peter depicted the sins of all men against 
God. These are the following: first is the transgression of the commandment 
which God gave to Adam, second is the transgression of the written Law, and 
third is the rejection of the Gospel proclamation. But when Peter repented, the 
Lord healed his denial and said three times, “simon, son of Jonah, do you love 
Me?” (John 21:17). Thereafter, Jesus wished to show to the Disciples how 
fearful death is for all men, and He said, “My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, 
even to death. Stay here and watch with Me.” He went a little farther and fell on 
His face and prayed, saying, “O My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass 
from Me; nevertheless, not as I will but as You will” (Matt. 26:38-39). He said 
these things as a man in order to cleverly deceive the devil, so that he might 

--- PAGE 9 ---
think that Christ, although appearing as a man, feared death. He did this, while 
knowing the truth, so He might not forsake the Mystery of the Cross. After this 
first prayer, the Lord returned to the Disciples and found them deep in sleep. 
Then the Lord addressed Peter and said, “What? Could you not watch with Me 
one hour? Watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is 
willing, but the flesh is weak” (Matt. 26:40-41). He said these things to Peter so 
that he would clearly understand that He meant, “You say that you wish to 
struggle until death, so you doze in this manner with the rest?” Again, a second 
time, He went away and prayed, saying, “O My Father, if this cup cannot pass 
away from Me unless I drink it, Your will be done.” And He came and found 
them asleep again, for their eyes were heavy. So He left them, went away again, 
and prayed the third time, saying the same words (Matt. 26:42-44). Then an 
angel appeared to Him from Heaven, strengthening Him. And being in agony, 
He prayed more earnestly. His sweat became like great drops of blood falling 
down to the ground (Luke 22:43-44). Then He came to His Disciples and said 
to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Behold, the hour is at hand, and the 
Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going. 
See, My betrayer is at hand” (Matt. 26:45-46). Then He went beyond the brook 
of Kidron, where there was a garden that He entered with His Disciples. The 
Lord regularly frequented the garden, and so Judas was well acquainted with the 
place. Judas then took some of the band of soldiers, with a crowd following, 
and came upon Jesus, giving them the signal of the false kiss. He arranged it in 
this way because many times when the Lord was seized He passed out of their 
midst unseen. Yet the Lord came forward and said to them, “Whom are you 
seeking?” (John 18:4,7). Since it was still night, they did not recognize Him. 
Therefore they looked upon Him with lighted lanterns and torches, and with 
fear they slowly withdrew. When they returned, He made all things known. 
When Judas gave the signal, Christ said, “Friend, why have you come?” 
(Matt.26:50). That is to say, “It is well timed, Judas, that you came.” And again 
He said, “Have you come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs to 
take Me? I sat daily with you, teaching in the Temple, and you did not seize Me” 
(Matt. 26:55). They came at night so that some kind of riot might not be 
provoked by the crowd. Then the very high-spirited Peter drew back a sword 
and rushed at Malchus, the servant of the High Priest, cutting off his right ear - 
the implication being that the High Priest neither heard nor taught the Law 
correctly. Then Christ reproved Peter, saying that it is not good that a spiritual 
man is known to make use of a sword, and He healed the ear of Malchus. They 

--- PAGE 10 ---
arrested Jesus and brought Him bound to the courtyard of the former High 
Priest, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas. There all the Pharisees and 
Scribes who held sentiments against Christ had been assembled. Also, as the 
night passed on, there occurred the conversation between Peter and the servant 
girl during which he denied the Lord three times as the cock crowed twice. 
When Peter remembered the Lord’s prophecy, he wept bitterly (see Mark 14:66-
72). When day arrived, they brought Christ from Annas to the High Priest 
Caiaphas, where He accepted both the spitters and the false witnesses who were 
summoned. When the day was already advanced, Caiaphas sent Him to Pilate. 
Those who brought Him did not enter into the Praetorium. so that they might 
not be defiled and might eat the Passover. For it appears that it was fitting that 
they eat the Passover then, especially from the many things Christ said before 
the Supper on Thursday evening when He ate it and afterwards handed over the 
more superb and exalted teachings. For, as we have said before, it was fitting 
that the Truth was to follow what was typified in the Law. As St. John the 
Theologian says, all these events came together before the feast of the Passover 
during the night of Thursday and on into Friday. For this reason we keep the 
feast, properly remembering these awesome and ineffable works and deeds.  
Through Thine ineffable compassion, O Christ our God, 
have mercy on us and save us. 
Amen.  
ODE VII  
Irmos: In Babylon the Children feared not the fiery furnace; * but cast 
into the midst of the flames * they were bedewed and sang: * “O God of 
our fathers, Blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
With bowed head, Judas plotted evil, seeking an opportunity to deliver to 
condemnation the Judge who is Lord of all and the God of our fathers. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
 “Among you there is one that shall betray Me,” Christ said to His friends; 
and they, forgetting their gladness, were seized with grief and anguish, saying: 
“Who shall this be? Tell us, O God of our fathers.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., “He that dippeth his hand with Me in the dish; it had 
been better for him had he never passed through the gates of life, for he would 
be revealed as the traitor of the God of our fathers.” 
Katavasia: In Babylon the Children feared not ..., 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ODE VIII  
Irmos: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws of their fathers, * the 
blessed Children in Babylon * scorned the foolish decree of the King. * 
Standing together in the midst of the flames, they remained unharmed, * 
and sang a song fitting for almighty God: * “O ye works of the Lord, 
praise ye the Lord * and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Blessed guests in Zion, the apostles, and faithful companions of the Word, 
followed the Shepherd like sheep united to Christ, and feeding upon the divine 
Word, they cried out in thanksgiving: “O ye works of the Lord, praise ye the 
Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Forgetting the law of friendship, iniquitous Iscariot hastened to the betrayal 
on the feet which Thou hadst Washed. Eating Thy Bread, the divine Body, he 
lifted up his heel against Thee; for he knew not how to cry: “O ye works of the 
Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him throughout all ages.” 
Refrain: Let us bless the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: the Lord! 
Having unconscionably received the Body that delivereth from sin, and the 
divine Blood that hath been shed for the world. He was not ashamed to drink 
that which he had sold for money; he felt no angst for sin; for he knew not how 
to cry: “O ye Works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord and supremely exalt Him 
throughout all ages.”  
 Both now ..., the foregoing is repeated: 
Verse: We praise, bless and worship the Lord, hymning and supremely 
exalting him throughout all ages! 
Katavasia: Suffering affliction for the sake of the laws ..., 
The Magnificat is not sung. 
ODE IX:  
Irmos: Come, ye faithful, let us raise our minds on high * and enjoy the 
Master’s hospitality * and the table of immortal life in the upper room; * 
and let us hear the exalted teaching of the Word * Whom We magnify. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
“Go”, said the Word to the disciples, “and prepare the Passover for those 
whom I shall call to share in the Mystery: with the unleavened bread of the 
word of truth prepare the Passover in the upper room where the mind shall be 
established, and magnify the strength of grace.” 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee our God, glory to Thee; 
Before all ages the Father hath begotten Me, who am Wisdom and the 
Creator, and He established Me as the beginning of His ways. He appointed Me 
to perform the works which have now been mystically accomplished. For 
though I am by nature the uncreated Word, I make My own, the speech and 
qualities of the manhood I have assumed. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Since I am man not merely in appearance, but in 
essence, the human nature united to Me is rendered godlike. Know Me, then, as 
one single Christ, who saveth those among whom I am, and of whom I am. 
Katavasia: Come, ye faithful, let us raise our minds on high ..., 
Prostration to the ground. 
The small Litany, followed by the Exapostilarion, in Tone III: 
Thy bridal chamber I see all-adorned, * O my Savior, * yet I have no 
wedding garment that I may enter therein. * Make the robe of my soul radiant, * 
O Giver of Light, ** and save me. (Thrice) 
On the Praises, 4 Stichera, in Tone II: 
Verse: Praise Him for His mighty acts, * praise Him according to the 
multitude of His greatness. 
The council of the Jews hasteneth to assemble, * to deliver the Fashioner 
and Creator of all over to Pilate. * O transgressors, O unbelievers! * For they 
make ready to surrender unto judgment, * Him who cometh to judge the living 
and the dead; * they prepare the Passion of Him * who healeth the passions. ** 
Great is Thy mercy, O longsuffering Lord: glory be to Thee. 
Verse: Praise Him with the sound of trumpet, * praise Him with the 
psaltery and harp. 
Judas the transgressor at the supper dipped his hand into the dish * with 
Thee, O Lord, * yet sinfully he reached out his hands to receive the money. * 
He reckoned the value of the myrrh, * but was not afraid to sell Thee who art 
above all price. * He stretched out his feet to be washed, * yet deceitfully he 
kissed the Master and betrayed Him to the breakers of the Law. * Cast from the 
company of the apostles, he threw away the thirty pieces of silver, * and did not 
see Thy Resurrection on the third day, ** by which do Thou have mercy on us. 
Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, * praise him with strings and 
flute. 
Judas, the deceitful traitor, * with a deceitful kiss betrayed the Lord and 
Savior; * he sold the Master of all as a slave to the transgressors; * the Lamb of 
God, the Son of the Father, * went as a sheep to the slaughter: ** for He alone 
is plenteous in mercy.” 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Verse: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals, praise Him with cymbals of 
jubilation. * Let every breath praise the Lord. 
Judas, servant and deceiver, * disciple and traitor, friend and false accuser, * 
was exposed by his deeds. * For he followed the Master, yet within himself he 
plotted to betray Him. * He said to himself: “I shall deliver Him up and gain the 
money that is promised.” * He desired the myrrh to be sold but Jesus to be 
taken by deceit. * He gave a kiss and handed over Christ; * and the Lord went 
as a sheep to the slaughter, ** for He alone is compassionate and the Lover of 
mankind. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone II: 
The Lamb whom Isaiah proclaimed * of His own will goeth to the 
slaughter. * He giveth His back over to scourging, * and His cheeks to blows, * 
and turneth not His face away from the shame of their spitting; * He is 
condemned to a disgraceful death. * Though sinless, He willingly accepteth all 
these things, ** that He may grant to all mankind resurrection from the dead. 
Then, Reader: To Thee is due glory, O Lord our God ..., 
Priest: Glory to Thee Who hast shown forth the light. 
The small Doxology is read. 
Litany: Let us complete our morning prayer ..., 
On the Aposticha, 4 Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Today the evil Sanhedrin hath assembled against Christ * and devised vain 
things against Him, * to deliver Him, though innocent, over to Pilate * to be put 
to death. * Today Judas placeth the noose of money around his neck, * and 
depriveth himself of life both temporal and divine. * Today Caiaphas 
prophesieth against his will, saying: * “It is expedient that one man should 
perish for the people.” * He came to suffer for our sins, that He might set us 
free * from bondage to the enemy: ** for He is good and the Lover of 
mankind. 
Verse: He that ate My bread * hath lifted up his heel against Me  
Today Judas layeth aside his pretence of love for the poor, * openly 
displaying his greed for money. * No longer doth he take thought for the needy. 
* He offereth now for sale, not the myrrh brought by the sinful woman, * but 
the Myrrh from heaven, * and he taketh the pieces of silver. * He hasteneth to 
the Jews saying to the transgressors: * “What will ye give me if I deliver Him 
over to you?” * O the avarice of the traitor! * agreeing that the sale be 

--- PAGE 14 ---
profitable, * and agreeable with the price of the purchasers, * He doth not 
dispute the price but selleth the Lord like a runaway slave; * for it is the custom 
of thieves to throw away that which is precious, * the disciple then casts away 
that which is holy * to the dogs, * and the madness of avarice filleth him with 
fury * against his own Master. * Let us flee from such temptations, and cry: ** 
O longsuffering Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Verse: His heart gathered iniquity to itself: * he went out and spoke of it. 
Thy ways are Deceitful, O lawless Judas; * Sickened by the love of money, * 
thou didst come to hate mankind. * If thou hast a love for riches, * why 
become a disciple of Him who teaches poverty? * But if thy love is for Him, * 
why sell the Lord who is above all price * and hand Him over to be murdered? 
* Tremble, O sun; * O earth groan and quaking cry aloud: ** O longsuffering 
Lord, glory be to Thee.  
Verse: They spoke lawless words * against Me. 
Let none, O ye faithful, who are uninstructed in the Mystery * draw near to 
the table; * let none approach deceitfully as did Judas. * For though he received 
his portion, * he betrayed the Bread. * He outwardly appeared to be a disciple, * 
but was present as a murderer. * He rejoiced with the Jews, though he sat at 
supper with the apostles. * He kissed in hatred, * and with the kiss he sold Him 
who hath redeemed us from the curse, ** the God and Savior of our souls. 
Glory ..., in Tone VIII: 
Thy ways are Deceitful, O lawless Judas; * Sickened by the love of money, * 
thou didst come to hate mankind. * If thou hast a love for riches, * why 
become disciple of Him who teaches poverty? * But if thy love is for Him, * 
why sell the Lord who is above all price * and hand Him over to be murdered? 
* Tremble, O sun; * O earth groan and quaking cry aloud: ** O longsuffering 
Lord, glory be to Thee.  
 Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Thou didst instruct Thy disciples in the Mystery, O Lord, * teaching them 
saying: * “My friends, take care that fear doth not separate you from Me. * For 
though I suffer, it is for the sake of the world. * Be not scandalized because of 
Me; * for I have not come to be ministered to, * but to minister, * and to give 
My life as a ransom for the world. * If then ye are My friends, ye will do as I do. 
* He who will be first, let him be as the last; * let the master be as the servant. * 
Abide in Me, that ye may bear fruit: ** for I am the vine of Life.” 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Then: It is good to give thanks unto the Lord ..., Trisagion through Our 
Father ..., then the Troparion of the betrayal may be read or chanted: 
Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
When The glorious disciples * were illumined at the Supper by the washing 
of their feet, * then the impious Judas * became darkened by the disease of 
avarice, * and he delivered Thee, the just judge, to lawless judges. * See, O lover 
of money, * how for money’s sake he hanged himself. * Flee from the insatiable 
greed which made him dare to do such things against his Master. * O Lord, 
who art good towards all mankind, glory be to Thee. 
Then the Litany: Have mercy on us ..., 
Priest: Wisdom. 
Choir: (Master) Bless 
Priest: He that is blessed, Christ our God, always, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. 
Choir: Amen. O Establish O God, the Holy Orthodox faith and Orthodox 
Christians, unto the ages of ages. 
Then the reader immediately beginneth the first hour. 
