--- PAGE 1 ---
РечE гDь свои1мъ ўченикHмъ: * Вёсте, ћкw по двою2 дню2 пaсха бyдетъ, и3 сн7ъ 
человёческій прeданъ бyдетъ на пропsтіе. ТогдA собрaшасz ґрхіерeє, и3 кни1жницы 
и3 стaрцы людстjи, во дв0ръ ґрхіерeовъ, глаг0лемагw каіaфы: И# совэщaша, да ї}са 
лeстію и4мутъ, и3 ўбію1тъ. Глаг0лаху же: но не въ прaздникъ, да не молвA бyдетъ 
въ лю1дехъ. Ї}су же бhвшу въ виfaніи, въ домY сjмwна прокажeннагw, Приступи2 
къ немY женA, стклsницу мЂра и3мyщи многоцённагw, и3 возливaше на главY 
є3гw2, возлежaщу. Ви1дэвше же ўченицы2 є3гw2, негодовaша, глаг0люще. чесw2 рaди 
ги1бель сіS бhсть; Можaше бо сіE мЂро продано2 бhти на мн0зэ, и3 дaтисz 
ни1щымъ. Разумёвъ же ї}съ речE и5мъ: что2 труждaете женY; дёло бо добро2 
содёла њ мнЁ. Всегдa бо ни1щыz и4мате съ соб0ю: менe же не всегдA и4мате. 
Возліsвши бо сіS мЂро сіE на тёло моE, на погребeніе мS сотвори2. Ґми1нь 
глаг0лю вaмъ: и3дёже ѓще проповёдано бyдетъ є3ђліе сіE во всeмъ мjрэ, речeтсz, и3 
є4же сотвори2 сіS, въ пaмzть є3S. ТогдA шeдъ є3ди1нъ t nбоюнaдесzте, 
глаг0лемый їyда їскаріHтскій, ко ґрхіерewмъ, РечE: чт0 ми х0щете дaти, и3 ѓзъ 
вaмъ предaмъ є3го2; nни1 же постaвиша є3мY три1десzть срeбрєникъ. И# tт0лэ 
и3скaше под0бна врeмене, да є3го2 предaстъ. Въ пeрвый же дeнь њпрэсн0чный 
приступи1ша ўченицы2 ї}сови, глаг0люще є3мY: гдЁ х0щещи, ўгот0ваемъ ти2 ћсти 
пaсху; Џнъ же речE: и3ди1те во грaдъ ко џнсицэ, и3 рцhте є3мY: ўчи1тель 
глаг0летъ, врeмz моE бли1зъ є4сть, ў тебE сотворю2 пaсху со ўченики2 мои1ми. И# 
сотвори1ша ўченицы2, ћкоже повелЁ и5мъ ї}съ: и3 ўгот0ваша пaсху. Вeчеру же 
бhвшу возлежaше со nбэманaдесzте ўченик0ма. Вёдый ї}съ, ћкw вс‰ дадE 
є3мY nц7ъ въ рyцэ, и3 ћкw t бGа и3зhде, и3 къ бGу грzдeтъ: Востaвъ съ вeчери, и3 
положи2 ри6зы, и3 пріeмъ лeнтіонъ, препоsсасz. Пот0мъ же вліS в0ду во 
ўмывaльницу, и3 начaтъ ўмывaти н0ги ўченикHмъ, и3 њтирaти лeнтіемъ, и4мже 
бЁ препоsсанъ. Пріи1де же къ сjмwну петрY, и3 глаг0ла є3мY т0й: гDи, тh ли мои2 
ўмhеши н0зэ; TвэщA ї}съ, и3 речE є3мY: є4же ѓзъ творю2, ты2 не вёси нhнэ, 
разумёеши же по си1хъ. Глаг0ла є3мY пeтръ: не ўмhеши нHгу моeю во вёки. 
tвэщA є3мY ї}съ: ѓще не ўмhю тебE, не и4маши чaсти со мн0ю. Глаг0ла є3мY 
сjмwнъ пeтръ: гDи, не н0зэ мои2 т0кмw, но и3 рyцэ и3 главY. Глаг0ла є3мY ї}съ: 
и3змовeнный не трeбуетъ, т0кмw н0зэ ўмhти, є4сть бо вeсь чи1стъ: и3 вы2 
чи1сти є3стE, но не вси2. Вёдzше бо предаю1щаго є3го2 сегw2 рaди речE: ћкw не вси2 
чи1сти є3стE. Е#гдa же ўмы2 н0ги и4хъ, пріsтъ ри6зы своS, возлeгъ пaки, речE и5мъ:  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Jesus spake unto his disciples saying: Ye know that after two days is the feast of 
the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified. Then assembled 
together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the 
palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, And consulted that they 
might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest 
there be an uproar among the people. Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the 
house of Simon the leper, There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box 
of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat. But when 
his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste? 
For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor. When 
Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath 
wrought a good work upon me. For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye 
have not always. For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it 
for my burial. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached 
in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a 
memorial of her. Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the 
chief priests, And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him 
unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. And from 
that time he sought opportunity to betray him. Now the first day of the feast of 
unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou 
that we prepare for thee to eat the passover? And he said, Go into the city to such 
a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the 
passover at thy house with my disciples. And the disciples did as Jesus had 
appointed them; and they made ready the passover. Now when the even was 
come, he sat down with the twelve. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all 
things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God; He 
riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded 
himself. After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the 
disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded. Then 
cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my 
feet? Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but 
thou shalt know hereafter. Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. 
Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. Simon Peter 
saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Jesus 
saith to him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean 
every whit: and ye are clean, but not all. For he knew who should betray him; 
therefore said he, Ye are not all clean. So after he had washed their feet, and had 
taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them:  
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
вёсте ли что2 сотвори1хъ вaмъ; Вы2 глашaете мS ўчи1телz и3 гDа: и3 д0брэ 
глаг0лете, є4смь бо. Ѓще ќбw ѓзъ ўмhхъ вaши н0зэ, гDь и3 ўчи1тель: и3 вы2 
д0лжни є3стE дрyгъ дрyгу ўмывaти н0зэ. Џбразъ бо дaхъ вaмъ, да ћкоже ѓзъ 
сотвори1хъ вaмъ, и3 вы2 твори1те. Ґми1нь ґми1нь глаг0лю вaмъ: нёсть рaбъ б0лій 
гDа своегw2, ни послaнникъ б0лій послaвшагw є3го2. Ѓще сі‰ вёсте, блажeни є3стE, 
ѓще творитE |. И# kдyщымъ и5мъ речE: ґми1нь глаг0лю вaмъ, ћкw є3ди1нъ t вaсъ 
предaстъ мS. И# скорбsще ѕэлw2, начaша глаг0лати є3мY є3ди1нъ кjйждо и4хъ: є3дA 
ѓзъ є4смь, гDи; Џнъ же tвэщaвъ речE: њмочи1вый со мн0ю въ соли1ло рyку, т0й 
мS предaстъ. Сн7ъ же человёческій и4детъ, ћкоже є4сть пи1сано њ нeмъ. г0ре же 
человёку томY, и4мже сн7ъ чlвёческій предaстсz: добро2 бы бhло є3мY, ѓще не бы2 
роди1лсz человёкъ т0й. Tвэщaвъ же їyда предаsй є3го2, речE: є3дA ѓзъ є4смь, раввJ; 
глаг0ла є3мY: ты2 речE. Kдyщымъ же и5мъ, пріeмъ ї}съ хлёбъ, и3 благослови1въ 
преломи2, и3 даsше ўченикHмъ, и3 речE: пріими1те, kди1те, сіE є4сть тёло моE. И# 
пріeмъ чaшу, хвалY воздaвъ, дадE и5мъ, глаг0лz: пjйте t неS вси2. Сіs бо є4сть 
кр0вь моS н0вагw завёта, ћже за мнHгіz и3зливaема, во њставлeніе грэхHвъ. 
Глаг0лю же вaмъ: ћкw не и4мамъ пи1ти t нhнэ t сегw2 плодA л0знагw, до днE 
тогw2, є3гдA и5 пію2 съ вaми н0во во цrтвіи nц7A моегw2. И# воспёвше, и3зыд0ша 
въ г0ру є3леHнску. ТогдA глаг0ла и5мъ ї}съ: вси2 вы2 соблазнитeсz њ мнЁ въ н0щь 
сію2. пи1сано бо є4сть: поражY пaстырz, и3 разhдутсz џвцы стaда. По воскресeніи 
же моeмъ, варsю вы2 въ галілeи. Tвэщaвъ же пeтръ речE є3мY: ѓще и3 вси2 
соблазнsтсz њ тебЁ, ѓзъ никогдaже соблажню1сz. РечE є3мY ї}съ: ґми1нь глаг0лю 
тебЁ, ћкw въ сію2 н0щь, прeжде дaже ґлeктwръ не возгласи1тъ, трикрaты 
tвeржешисz менE. Глаг0ла є3мY пeтръ: ѓще ми2 є4сть и3 ўмрeти съ тоб0ю, не 
tвeргусz тебE. тaкожде и3 вси2 ўченицы2 рёша. ТогдA пріи1де съ ни1ми ї}съ въ вeсь 
нарицaемую геfсимaніа, и3 глаг0ла ўченикHмъ: сэди1те тY, д0ндеже шeдъ 
помолю1сz тaмw. И# поeмъ петрA и3 џба сhна зеведeова, начaтъ скорбёти и3 
тужи1ти. ТогдA глаг0ла и5мъ ї}съ: приск0рбна є4сть душA моS до смeрти: пожди1те 
здЁ, и3 бди1те со мн0ю. И# прешeдъ мaлw, падE на лицЁ своeмъ, молsсz, и3 
глаг0лz: џ§е м0й, ѓще возм0жно є4сть, да мимои1детъ t менE чaша сіS: nбaче 
не ћкоже ѓзъ хощY, но ћкоже ты2. Kви1сz же є3мY ѓгGлъ съ небесE ўкрэплsz 
є3го2. И# бhвъ въ п0двизэ, прилёжнэе молsшесz: бhсть же п0тъ є3гw2, ћкw 
кaплz кр0ве кaплющи на зeмлю. И# востaвъ t моли1твы, И# пришeдъ ко  

--- PAGE 4 ---
Know ye what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; 
for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought 
to wash one another’s feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as 
I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than 
his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him. If ye know these 
things, happy are ye if ye do them. And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto 
you, that one of you shall betray me. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and 
began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I? And he answered and 
said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me. The 
Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son 
of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born. Then 
Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, 
Thou hast said. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and 
brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he 
took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; For 
this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, 
until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom. And when 
they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives. Then saith Jesus 
unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I 
will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. But 
after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee. Peter answered and said 
unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be 
offended. Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this night, before the 
cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. Peter said unto him, Though I should die 
with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples. Then 
cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the 
disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And he took with him Peter 
and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy. Then 
saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye 
here, and watch with me. And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and 
prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: 
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt And there appeared an angel unto him 
from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony he prayed more 
earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the 
ground. And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ўченикHмъ, и3 њбрёте и5хъ спsщz, и3 глаг0ла петр0ви: тaкw ли не возмог0сте 
є3ди1нагw часA побдёти со мн0ю; Бди1те и3 моли1тесz, да не вни1дете въ напaсть: 
дyхъ бо б0дръ, пл0ть же немощнA. Пaки втори1цею шeдъ помоли1сz, глаг0лz: џ§е 
м0й, ѓще не м0жетъ сіS чaша мимоити2 t менE, ѓще не пію2 є3S, бyди в0лz 
твоS. И# пришeдъ њбрёте и5хъ пaки спsщz, бёста бо и5мъ џчи њтzготёнэ. И# 
њстaвль и5хъ, шeдъ пaки помоли1сz трети1цею, т0жде сл0во рeкъ. ТогдA пріи1де ко 
ўченикHмъ свои1мъ, и3 глаг0ла и5мъ: спи1те пр0чее, и3 почивaйте: сE прибли1жисz 
чaсъ, и3 сн7ъ человёческій предаeтсz въ рyки грёшникwвъ. Востaните, и4демъ: сE 
прибли1жисz предаsй мS. И# є3щE є3мY глаг0лющу, сE їyда є3ди1нъ t nбоюнaдесzте 
пріи1де, и3 съ ни1мъ нар0дъ мн0гъ, со nрyжіемъ и3 дрек0льми, t ґрхіерє1й и3 стaрєцъ 
людски1хъ. Предаsй же є3го2, дадE и5мъ знaменіе, глаг0лz: є3г0же ѓще лобжY, т0й 
є4сть, и3ми1те є3го2. И# ѓбіе пристyпль ко ї}сови, речE: рaдуйсz раввJ, и3 њблобызA 
є3го2. Ї}съ же речE є3мY: дрyже, твори2 на нeже є3си2 пришeл тогдA пристyпльше 
возложи1ша рyцэ на ї}са, и3 ћша є3го2. И# сE є3ди1нъ t сyщихъ со ї}сомъ, простeръ 
рyку, и3звлечE н0жъ св0й: и3 ўдaри рабA ґрхіерeова, и3 ўрёза є3мY ќхо. ТогдA 
глаг0ла є3мY ї}съ: возврати2 н0жъ тв0й въ мёсто є3гw2: вси1 бо пріeмшіи н0жъ 
ножeмъ поги1бнутъ: И#ли2 мни1тсz ти2, ћкw не могY нhнэ ўмоли1ти nц7A моего2, 
и3 предстaвитъ ми2 вsщше и3ли2 дванaдесzте легеHна ѓгGлъ; Кaкw же u5бо сбyдутсz 
пис†ніz, ћкw тaкw подобaетъ бhти; Въ т0й чaсъ речE ї}съ нар0дwмъ: ћкw на 
разб0йника ли и3зыд0сте со nрyжіемъ и3 дрек0льми, ћти мS; по всS дни2 при 
вaсъ сэдёхъ ўчS въ цRкви, и3 не ћсте менE. Сe же всE бhсть, да сбyдутсz 
пис†ніz прор0чєскаz. тогдA ўченицы2 вси2 њстaвльше є3го2, бэжaша. В0ини 
жеє4мше ї}са вед0ша къ каіaфэ ґрхіерeови, и3дёже кни1жницы и3 стaрцы 
собрaшасz. Пeтръ же и3дsше по нeмъ и3здалeча, до дворA ґрхіерeова: и3 вшeдъ 
внyтрь, сэдsше со слугaми, ви1дэти кончи1ну. Ґрхіерeє же и3 стaрцы, и3 с0нмъ 
вeсь, и3скaху лжесвидётельства на ї}са, ћкw да ўбію1тъ є3го2, И# не њбрэтaху: и3 
мнHгимъ лжесвидётелємъ пристyпльшымъ, не њбрэт0ша. п0слэжде же 
приступи1ша двA лжесвидётелz, Рёста: сeй речE, могY разори1ти цRковь б9ію, и3 
треми2 дeньми создaти ю5. И# востaвъ ґрхіерeй, речE є3мY: ничесHже ли 
tвэщавaеши, что2 сjи на тS свидётельствуютъ. Ї}съ же молчaше. и3 tвэщaвъ 
ґрхіерeй, речE є3мY: заклинaю тS бGомъ живhмъ, да речeши нaмъ, ѓще ты2 є3си2 
хrт0съ сн7ъ б9ій; Глаг0ла є3мY ї}съ: ты2 речE. nбaче глаг0лю вaмъ: tсeлэ ќзрите  

--- PAGE 6 ---
disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch 
with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit 
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. He went away again the second time, and 
prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I 
drink it, thy will be done. And he came and found them asleep again: for their 
eyes were heavy. And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third 
time, saying the same words. Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto 
them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son 
of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at 
hand that doth betray me. And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, 
came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief 
priests and elders of the people. Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, 
saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast. And forthwith he 
came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him. And Jesus said unto him, 
Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus and 
took him. And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his 
hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest’s, and smote off 
his ear. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all 
they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot 
now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions 
of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? In 
that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief 
with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the 
temple, and ye laid no hold on me. But all this was done, that the scriptures of the 
prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled. And 
they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where 
the scribes and the elders were assembled. But Peter followed him afar off unto 
the high priest’s palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end. 
Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against 
Jesus, to put him to death; But found none: yea, though many false witnesses 
came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witnesses, And said, This 
fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days. 
And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it 
which these witness against thee? But Jesus held his peace, And the high priest 
answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us 
whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: 
nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
сн7а человёческаго сэдsща њдеснyю си1лы, и3 грzдyща на џблацэхъ нбcныхъ. ТогдA 
ґрхіерeй растерзA ри6зы своS, глаг0лz: ћкw хулY глаг0ла, что2 є3щE трeбуемъ 
свидётелей; сE нhнэ слhшасте хулY є3гw2: Чт0 сz вaмъ мни1тъ; nни1 же 
tвэщaвше, рёша: пови1ненъ є4сть смeрти. ТогдA заплевaша лицE є3гw2, и3 
°пaкwсти є3мY дёzху° џвіи же за лани1ту ўдaриша Глаг0люще: прорцы2 нaмъ хrтE, 
кт0 є3сть ўдарeй тS; Пeтръ же внЁ сэдsше во дворЁ, и3 приступи2 къ немY 
є3ди1на рабhнz, глаг0лющи: и3 ты2 бЁ со ї}сомъ галілeйскимъ. Џнъ же tвeржесz 
пред8 всёми, глаг0лz: не вёмъ, что2 глаг0леши. И#зшeдшу же є3мY ко вратHмъ, 
ўзрЁ є3го2 другaz, и3 глаг0ла и5мъ тY: и3 сeй бЁ со ї}сомъ назwрeомъ. И# пaки 
tвeржесz съ клsтвою: ћкw не знaю человёка. По мaлэ же приступи1вше 
стоsщіи, рёша петр0ви: вои1стинну и3 ты2 t ни1хъ є3си2: и4бо бесёда твоS ћвэ тS 
твори1тъ. ТогдA начaтъ роти1тисz и3 клsтисz, ћкw не знaю человёка. и3 ѓбіе 
пётелъ возгласи2. И# помzнY пeтръ глаг0лъ ї}совъ, речeнный є3мY: ћкw прeжде 
дaже пётелъ не возгласи1тъ, трикрaты tвeржешисz менE, и3 и3зшeдъ в0нъ плaкасz 
г0рькw. Ќтру же * бhвшу, совётъ сотвори1ша вси2 ґрхіерeє и3 стaрцы людстjи на 
ї}са, ћкw ўби1ти є3го2. И# свzзaвше є3го2 вед0ша, и3 предaша є3го2 понтjйскому 
пілaту и3гeмwну. 
Конeцъ четверткY вели1кому на літургjи. 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of 
heaven. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; 
what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his 
blasphemy. What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death. Then 
did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms 
of their hands, Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee? 
Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou 
also wast with Jesus of Galilee. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not 
what thou sayest. And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw 
him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of 
Nazareth. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. And after a 
while came unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art 
one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee. Then began he to curse and to swear, 
saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew. And Peter 
remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou 
shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly. When the morning was 
come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to 
put him to death: And when they had bound him, they led him away, and 
delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor. 
 
 
