--- PAGE 1 ---
HOLY AND GREAT FRIDAY 
THE ROYAL HOURS 
COMPOSED BY ST. CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF ALEXANDRIA. 
FIRST HOUR 
Note: At the beginning of the second hour (8:00 A.M.), the bells are 
rung. When we have assembled in church, the priest vesteth in an 
epitrachilion and phelonion, and the deacon in a stikharion. The 
paraecclesiarch setteth forth an analogion, suitably adorned, facing the 
royal doors, and he lighteth a candle on a candle-stand. The priest 
entereth the nave of the church, or the refectory, through the royal 
doors, the deacon preceding him bearing a censer. The priest setteth the 
Holy Gospel on the analogion and, standing before the analogion, 
intoneth the usual beginning, and after the exclamation (following the 
Lord’s Prayer), the priest censeth around the analogion on which the 
Holy Gospel resteth, and then censeth the rest of the icons, the whole 
temple, the superior and the brethren.  
Priest: Blessed is our God ..., Reader: Glory to Thee O God ..., O 
heavenly King ..., Holy God ..., Our Father ..., Lord have mercy (12 
times), Glory ..., Both now ..., O come, let us worship ..., and then: 
PSALM 5:  
Unto my words give ear, O Lord, hear my cry. Attend unto the voice of my 
supplication, O my King and my God; for unto Thee will I pray, O Lord. In the 
morning shalt Thou hear my voice. In the morning shall I stand before Thee, 
and Thou shalt look upon me; for not a God that willest iniquity art Thou. He 
that worketh evil shall not dwell near Thee nor shall transgressors abide before 
Thine eyes. Thou hast hated all them that work iniquity; Thou shalt destroy all 
them that speak a lie. A man that is bloody and deceitful shall the Lord abhor. 
But as for me, in the multitude of Thy mercy shall I go into Thy house, I shall 
worship toward Thy holy temple in fear of Thee. O Lord, guide me in the way 
of Thy righteousness; because of mine enemies, make straight my way before 
Thee, For in their mouth there is no truth; their heart is vain. Their throat is an 
open sepulcher, with their tongues have they spoken deceitfully; judge them, O 
God. Let them fall down on account of their own devisings; according to the 
multitude of their ungodliness, cast them out, for they have embittered Thee, O 
Lord. And let all them be glad that hope in Thee; they shall rejoice, and Thou 
shalt dwell among them. And all shall glory in Thee that love Thy name, for 
Thou shalt bless the righteous. O Lord, as with a shield of Thy good pleasure 
hast Thou crowned us. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
PSALM 2:  
Why have the heathen raged, and the peoples meditated empty things? The 
kings of the earth were aroused, and the rulers were assembled together, against 
the Lord, and against His Christ. Let us break their bonds asunder, and let us 
cast away their yoke from us. He that dwelleth in the heavens shall laugh them 
to scorn, and the Lord shall deride them. Then shall He speak unto them in His 
wrath, and in His anger shall He trouble them. But as for Me, I was established 
as king by Him, upon Sion His holy mountain, proclaiming the commandment 
of the Lord. The Lord said unto Me: Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten 
Thee. Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the nations for Thine inheritance, and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession. Thou shalt herd them with a 
rod of iron; Thou shalt shatter them like a potter’s vessels. And now, O ye 
kings, understand; be instructed, all ye that judge the earth. Serve ye the Lord 
with fear, and rejoice in Him with trembling. Lay hold of instruction, lest at any 
time the Lord be angry, and ye perish from the righteous way. 
PSALM 21: 
 O God, my God, attend to me; why hast Thou forsaken me? Far from my 
salvation are the words of my transgressions. My God, I will cry by day, and wilt 
Thou not hearken? and by night, and it shall not be unto folly for me. But as for 
Thee, Thou dwellest in the sanctuary, O Praise of Israel. In Thee have our 
fathers hoped; they hoped, and Thou didst deliver them. Unto Thee they cried, 
and were saved, in Thee they hoped, and were not brought to shame. But as for 
me, I am a worm, and not a man, a reproach of men, and the outcast of the 
people. All that look upon me have laughed me to scorn; they have spoken with 
their lips and have wagged their heads: He hoped in the Lord; let Him deliver 
him, let Him save him, for He desireth him. For Thou art He that drewest me 
forth from the womb; my hope from the breasts of my mother. On Thee was I 
cast from the womb; from my mother’s womb, Thou art my God. Depart not 
from me, for tribulation is nigh, for there is none to help me. Many bullocks 
have encircled me, fat bulls have surrounded me. They have opened their 
mouth against me, as might a lion ravenous and roaring. I have been poured out 
like water, and scattered are all my bones; my heart is become like wax melting 
in the midst of my bowels. My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my 
tongue hath cleaved to my throat, and into the dust of death hast Thou brought 
me down. For many dogs have encircled me, the congregation of evil doers 
hath surrounded me; they have pierced my hands and my feet. They have 
numbered all my bones, and they themselves have looked and stared upon me. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
They have parted my garments amongst themselves, and for my vesture have 
they cast lots. But Thou, O Lord, remove not Thy help far from me; attend 
unto mine aid. Rescue my soul from the sword, even this only-begotten one of 
mine from the hand of the dog. Save me from the mouth of the lion, and my 
lowliness from the horns of the unicorns. I will declare Thy name unto my 
brethren, in the midst of the church will I hymn Thee. Ye that fear the Lord, 
praise Him; all ye that are of the seed of Jacob, glorify Him; let all fear Him that 
are of the seed of Israel. For He hath not set at naught nor abhorred the 
supplications of the pauper, nor hath He turned His face from me; and when I 
cried unto Him, He hearkened unto me. From Thee is my praise, in the great 
church will I confess Thee; my vows will I pay before them that fear Thee. The 
poor shall eat and be filled, and they that seek the Lord shall praise Him; their 
hearts shall live for ever and ever. All the ends of the earth shall remember and 
shall turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship 
before Him. For the kingdom is the Lord’s and He Himself is sovereign of the 
nations. All they that be fat upon the earth have eaten and worshipped; all they 
that go down into the earth shall fall down before Him. Yea, my soul liveth for 
Him, and my seed shall serve Him. The generation that cometh shall be told of 
the Lord, and they shall proclaim His righteousness to a people that shall be 
born, which the Lord hath made.  
Then: Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O 
God (Thrice). Lord have mercy (Thrice). 
Glory ..., Troparion in Tone I: 
O Christ, when Thou wast crucified, * the tyranny of the enemy perished, * 
his might trampled underfoot. * For not an angel nor a man hath saved us, * 
but Thou Thyself, O Lord: ** glory be to Thee. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion: 
What shall we call thee, O thou who art full of grace? Heaven, for from thee 
hast dawned forth the Sun of Righteousness. Paradise, for from thee hath 
blossomed forth the flower of immortality. Virgin, for thou hast remained 
incorrupt. Pure Mother, for thou hast held in thy holy embrace the Son, the 
God of all. Do thou entreat Him to save our souls. 
Then we chant the following Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Today the veil of the temple is rent in twain, * reproving the transgressors; * 
and the sun hideth its rays, ** seeing the Master crucified (Twice). 
Why did the heathen rage, ** and the people imagine vain things?  

--- PAGE 4 ---
In Tone VIII: 
Thou wast led as a sheep to the slaughter, * O Christ our King, * and as an 
innocent Lamb Thou wast nailed to the Cross * by wicked men for our sins, ** 
O Lover of mankind. 
Verse: The kings of the earth were aroused, and the rulers were 
assembled together against the Lord, * and against His Christ. 
Repeat: Thou wast led as a sheep ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VIII: 
Suffering the transgressors to take hold of Thee, * Thou didst cry aloud O 
Lord: * “Even though ye smite the Shepherd and scatter the twelve sheep, * My 
disciples, * I could summon more than twelve legions of angels. * But in My 
patience I forbear, * that the hidden secrets I made known to you through My 
prophets * may be fulfilled.” ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: His heart spake vanity, * he gathered iniquity unto 
himself. 
Verse: Blessed is the man that hath understanding for the poor and the 
pauper. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ZECHARIAH (11:10 -13) 
I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my 
covenant which I had made with all the people. And it was broken in that day: 
and so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the word of 
the Lord. And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if not, 
forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said 
unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was priced at of them. 
And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house 
of the Lord. 
Deacon: Wisdom!  
Reader: The Reading from the Epistle of the Holy Apostle Paul to the 
Galatians. 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS (6: 14-18) 
Brethren: God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in 
Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a 
new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, 

--- PAGE 5 ---
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. From henceforth let no man trouble 
me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren, the grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. 
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel. 
Priest: Peace be unto all. 
Reader: And to thy spirit. 
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Matthew  
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (27: 1-56). 
At that time: When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of 
the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death: And when they had 
bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the 
governor. Judas, when he saw that Jesus was condemned, repented himself, and 
brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying, I 
have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, what is 
that to us? See thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, 
and departed, and went and hanged himself. And the chief priests took the 
silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because 
it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with them the 
potter’s field, to bury strangers in. Therefore that field was called, The field of 
blood, unto this day. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the 
prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that 
was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value; and gave them for 
the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me. And Jesus stood before the 
governor: and the governor asked Him, saying, Art Thou the King of the Jews? 
And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest. And when He was accused of the chief 
priests and elders, He answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest 
Thou not how many things they witness against Thee? And He answered him 
to never a word, insomuch that the governor marveled greatly. Now at that 
feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they 
would. And they had then, a notable prisoner, called Barabbas. Therefore when 
they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, whom will ye that I release 
unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ? For he knew that for envy 
they had delivered Him. When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife 
sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have 

--- PAGE 6 ---
suffered many things this day in a dream because of Him. But the chief priests 
and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy 
Jesus. The governor answered and said unto them, whether of the twain will ye 
that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas. Pilate saith unto them, what shall I 
do then with Jesus which is called Christ? They all say unto him, Let Him be 
crucified. And the governor said, why, what evil hath He done? But they cried 
out the more, saying, Let Him be crucified. When Pilate saw that he could 
prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed 
his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just 
person: see ye to it. Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, 
and on our children. Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had 
scourged Jesus, he delivered Him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the 
governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto Him the whole 
band of soldiers. And they stripped Him, and put on Him a scarlet robe. And 
when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon His head, and a reed 
in His right hand: and they bowed the knee before Him, and mocked Him, 
saying, Rejoice, King of the Jews! And they spit upon Him, and took the reed, 
and smote Him on the head. And after that they had mocked Him, they took 
the robe off from Him, and put His own raiment on Him, and led Him away to 
crucify Him. And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by 
name: him they compelled to bear His cross. And when they were come unto a 
place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull, They gave him vinegar to 
drink mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. 
And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be 
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among 
them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. And sitting down they watched 
him there; And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS 
THE KING OF THE JEWS. Then were there two thieves crucified with him, 
one on the right hand, and another on the left. And they that passed by reviled 
him, wagging their heads, And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and 
buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down 
from the cross. Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes 
and elders, said, He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of 
Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. He 
trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am 
the Son of God. The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same 
in his teeth. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto 

--- PAGE 7 ---
the ninth hour. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, 
Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me? Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This 
man calleth for Elias. And straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and 
filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. The rest said, 
Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him. Jesus, when he had cried 
again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. And, behold, the veil of the 
temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, 
and the rocks rent; And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints 
which slept arose, And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went 
into the holy city, and appeared unto many. Now when the centurion, and they 
that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that 
were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God. And 
many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, 
ministering unto him: Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the 
mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedees children. 
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Then immediately the reader sayeth: My steps do Thou direct according to 
thy saying, and let no iniquity have dominion over me. Deliver me from the 
false accusations of men, and I will keep Thy commandments. Make Thy face 
to shine upon Thy servant, and teach me Thy statutes.  
Let my mouth be filled with Thy praise, that I may hymn Thy glory and Thy 
majesty all the day long. 
Then Holy God ..., through Our Father ..., followed by:  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Come, and let us all sing the praises of Him who was crucified for us. * For 
when Mary beheld Him on the Tree she said: ** “Though Thou dost endure the 
Cross, yet Thou art my Son and God.” 
Lord have mercy (40 times), and the Prayer of the Hours:  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners; Who callest all mankind to salvation through the promise of good 
things to come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life 
toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, 
correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, 

--- PAGE 8 ---
evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided 
by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and to the knowledge of 
Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice). Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
More honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
Reader: In the name of the Lord, Father Bless. 
Priest: O God be gracious unto us ..., 
And the prayer: 
Reader: O Christ, the True Light, Who enlightenest and sanctifiest every 
man that cometh into the world: Let the Light of Thy countenance be signed 
upon us, that in it we may see the Unapproachable Light, and guide our steps in 
the doing of Thy commandments, through the intercessions of Thy most pure 
Mother, and of all Thy saints. Amen.  
 
Note: At the first Hour the Deacon, or the Priest if there be no Deacon, 
censeth the Gospels, Iconostasis, the Church, and the people. 
Immediately there follows the third hour: 
 

--- PAGE 9 ---
THIRD HOUR 
Note: At the third and sixth hours the Deacon, or the Priest, censeth the 
Gospels, and Iconostasis. 
O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice) 
PSALM 34 
Judge them, O Lord, that do me injustice; war against them that war against 
me. Take hold of weapon and shield, and arise unto my help. Draw out a 
sword, and shut the way against them that persecute me; say to my soul, I am 
thy salvation. Let them that seek my soul be shamed and confounded. Let them 
be turned back, and be utterly put to shame, they that devise evils against me. 
Let them become as dust before the face of the wind, an angel of the Lord also 
afflicting them. Let their way become darkness and a sliding, an angel of the 
Lord also pursuing them. For without cause have they secretly prepared for me 
destruction in their snare, without reason have they cast reproach on my soul. 
Let a snare come upon him, which he knoweth not; and let the trap, which he 
hath hidden, catch him, and into that same snare let him fall. But my soul shall 
rejoice in the Lord, it shall delight in His salvation. All my bones shall say: Lord, 
O Lord, who is like unto Thee? Delivering the beggar from the hand of them 
that are stronger than he, yea, poor man and pauper from them that despoil 
him. Unjust witnesses rose up against me; things I knew not they asked me. 
They repaid me with evil things for good, and barrenness for my soul. But as 
for me, when they troubled me, I put on sackcloth. And I humbled my soul 
with fasting, and my prayer shall return to my bosom. As though it had been a 
neighbor, as though it had been our brother, so sought I to please; as one 
mourning and sad of countenance, so humbled I myself. Yet against me they 
rejoiced and gathered together; scourges were gathered together upon me, and I 
knew it not. They were rent asunder, yet not pricked at heart; they tempted me, 
they mocked me with mockery, they gnashed upon me with their teeth. O Lord, 
when wilt Thou look upon me? Deliver my soul from their evil doing, even this 
only-begotten one of mine from the lions. I will confess Thee in the great 
congregation; among a mighty people will I praise Thee. Let not them rejoice 
against me that unjustly are mine enemies, they that hate me without a cause, 
and wink with their eyes. For peaceably indeed they spake unto me, but in their 
wrath were they devising deceits. And they opened wide their mouth against 
me; they said: Well done, well done, our eyes have seen it. Thou hast seen it, O 
Lord; keep not silence. O Lord, depart not from me. Arise, O Lord, and be 

--- PAGE 10 ---
attentive unto my judgment, my God, and my Lord, unto my cause judge me, O 
Lord, according to Thy righteousness; O Lord my God, let them not rejoice 
against me. Let them not say in their hearts: Well done, well done, our soul. Let 
them not say: We have swallowed him up. Let them be shamed and confounded 
together who rejoice at my woes. Let them be clothed with shame and 
confusion who speak boastful words against me. Let them rejoice and be glad 
who desire the righteousness of my cause, and let them that desire the peace of 
Thy servant say continually: The Lord be magnified. And my tongue shall speak 
of Thy righteousness, and of Thy praise all the day long. 
PSALM 108  
God, my praise do not pass over in silence; for the mouth of the sinner and 
the mouth of the deceitful man are opened against me. They have spoken 
against me with a deceitful tongue, and with words of hatred have they 
encompassed me, and they have warred against me without a cause. In return 
for my love, they have falsely accused me; but as for me, I gave myself to 
prayer. And they repaid me evil for good, and hatred for my love. Set Thou a 
sinner over him, and let the devil stand at his right hand. When he is judged, let 
him go forth condemned, and let his prayer become sin. Let his days be few, 
and his bishopric let another take. Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a 
widow. Let his children be vagabonds without a dwelling-place, and let them 
beg; let them be cast out from their ruined dwellings. Let his creditor search out 
all his substance, and let strangers plunder all his labors. Let there be for him no 
helper, nor anyone to pity his fatherless children. Let his children be given over 
to utter destruction, in a single generation let his name be blotted out. Let the 
iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the Lord, and let not the sin of his 
mother be blotted out. Let them be before the Lord continually, and let the 
memory of them perish from off the earth, Because he remembered not to 
show mercy; and persecuted a man that was poor and a beggar, and one broken 
in heart, that he might slay him. And he loved cursing, and it shall come upon 
him; and he delighted not in blessing, and it shall be far from him. And he put 
on cursing like a garment, and it went in like water into his bowels, and like oil 
into his bones Let it be for him like a garment wherewith he is clothed, and like 
a girdle wherewith continually he is girded. This is the dealing of the Lord with 
them that slander me, and with them that speak evil things against my soul. But 
Thou, O Lord, O Lord, deal Thou with me for Thy name’s sake; for Thy mercy 
is good. Deliver me, for a poor man am I and a pauper, and my heart is 
troubled within me. Like a shadow when it declineth am I taken away, I am 

--- PAGE 11 ---
shaken oil as the locusts. My knees are grown weak through fasting, and my 
flesh is changed for want of oil. And I am become a reproach unto them; they 
saw me and wagged their heads. Help me, O Lord my God, and save me 
according to Thy mercy. And let them know that this is Thy hand and that 
Thou, O Lord, hast wrought it. They will curse, and Thou wilt bless; let them 
that rise up against me be put to shame, but Thy servant shall be glad. Let them 
that slander me be clothed with confusion, and let them be covered with shame 
as with a mantle. I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth, and in the midst 
of many will I praise Him. For He hath stood at the right hand of the poor, to 
save my soul from them that persecute me. 
PSALM 50 
Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according to 
the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me 
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine 
iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and 
done this evil before Thee, that Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and 
prevail when Thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in 
sins did my mother bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and 
secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt 
sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; 
the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my sins, 
and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy 
Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy 
governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the 
ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, 
Thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O 
Lord, Thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if 
Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou 
shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is 
broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy good 
pleasure unto Zion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt Thou 
be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt 
offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar. 
Then: Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God 
(Thrice). Lord have mercy (Thrice). 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Glory ..., Troparion, in Tone VI: 
O Lord, the Jews condemned to death, * Thou who art the Life of all; * with 
the rod of Moses, Thou didst lead them through the Red Sea on dry ground, * 
yet they nailed Thee upon the Cross; * Thou didst suckle them with honey from 
the rock, * yet they gave Thee gall to drink. * But Thou hast willingly endured 
all these things, * to free us from the bondage of the enemy. ** O Christ God, 
glory be to Thee. 
 Both now ..., the Theotokion: 
O Theotokos, thou art the true vine * that hast budded forth for us the Fruit 
of life. * Thee do we entreat: * Pray thou, O Lady, * with the holy apostles, ** 
that He have mercy upon our souls.  
Then we chant the following Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
For fear of the Jews, Thy friend and companion Peter * denied Thee, O 
Lord, * and weeping bitterly he cried aloud: * “Ignore not my tears in silence, O 
compassionate One; * for I said I would keep the faith, * but did not keep it.” 
** Accept also our repentance and have mercy on us. 
Verse: Unto my words give ear, O Lord; * hear my cry. 
In Tone VIII: 
Before Thy precious Cross, O Lord, * the soldiers mocked Thee, * and the 
noetic hosts were struck with wonder. * For Thou who hast adorned the earth 
with flowers * wast arrayed in a crown of shame; * and Thou who hast arrayed 
the firmament with clouds * wast adorned in a robe of mockery. * Thus in Thy 
loving providence, O Christ, * Thou hast made known Thy compassionate 
goodness and great mercy: ** glory be to Thee. 
Verse: Attend unto the voice of my supplication, * O my King and my 
God 
Repeat: Before Thy precious Cross, O Lord ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
When Thou wast led to the Cross, O Lord, * Thou didst cry aloud: * “For 
what deed do ye seek to crucify Me, O ye Jews? * Is it because I made your 
paralyzed to walk, * because I raised the dead as though from sleep? * I healed 
her that had an issue of blood, * and I took pity on the Canaanite woman: * for 
what deed do ye seek to kill Me, O ye Jews? ** But, O ye transgressors, ye shall 
look on Christ Whom now ye pierce.” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: For I am ready for scourges: * and my sorrow is 
continually before me. 
Verse: O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger: nor chasten me in Thy 
wrath. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (50:4 - 11) 
The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know 
how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by 
morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. The Lord God hath 
opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. I gave my 
back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not 
my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help me; therefore 
shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know 
that I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with 
me? let us stand together; who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. 
Behold, the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? Lo, they 
all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up. Who is among you 
that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in 
darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay 
upon his God. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about 
with sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. 
This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow. 
Deacon: Wisdom!  
Reader: The Reading from the Epistle of the Holy Apostle Paul to the 
Romans. 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (5:6-10) 
Brethren: when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for 
the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for 
a good man some would even dare to die. But God commendeth his love 
toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more 
then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through 
him. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of 
his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. 
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel. 
Priest: Peace be unto all. 
Reader: And to thy spirit. 
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Mark  
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Deacon: Let us attend. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK (15:16-41). 
At that time: they called together the whole band of soldiers. And they 
clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his 
head, and began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews! And they smote him on 
the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing their knees 
worshipped him. And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple 
from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. And 
they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, 
the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross. And they bring him unto 
the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a skull. And they 
gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he received it not. And when 
they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what 
every man should take. And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. And 
the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE 
JEWS. And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and 
the other on his left. And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith: And he was 
numbered with the transgressors. And they that passed by railed on him, 
wagging their heads, and saying: Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and 
buildest it in three days, save thyself, and come down from the cross. Likewise 
also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes, He saved 
others; himself he cannot save. Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from 
the Cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him 
reviled him. And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the 
whole land until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud 
voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And some of them that stood by, when 
they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elias. And one ran and filled a sponge full 
of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying; Let alone; let us 
see whether Elias will come to take him down. And Jesus cried with a loud 
voice, and gave up the ghost. And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from 
the top to the bottom. And when the centurion, which stood over against him, 
saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said: Truly this man was the 
Son of God. There were also women looking on afar off, among whom was 
Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and 
Salome; (Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto 
him); and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem. 
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Then immediately the reader sayeth: Blessed is the Lord God, blessed is the 
Lord day by day; the God of our salvation shall prosper us along the way; our 
God is the God of salvation. 
Then Holy God ..., through Our Father ..., followed by:  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Come, and let us all sing the praises of Him who was crucified for us. * For 
when Mary beheld Him on the Tree she said: ** “Though Thou dost endure the 
Cross, yet Thou art my Son and God.” 
Lord have mercy (40 times), and the Prayer of the Hours:  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners; Who callest all mankind to salvation through the promise of good 
things to come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life 
toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, 
correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, 
evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided 
by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and to the knowledge of 
Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
More honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than 
the seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the very 
Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father Bless. 
Priest: By the prayers of our holy Fathers ..., 
And the prayer of the third hour: 
O Master God, the Father Almighty, O Lord, the Only-begotten Son, Jesus 
Christ, and O Holy Spirit, one Godhead, one Power: Have mercy on me a 
sinner, and by the judgments which Thou knowest, save me, Thine unworthy 
servant; for blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
 
Immediately there follows the sixth hour: 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
SIXTH HOUR 
O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice) 
PSALM 53 
O God, in Thy name save me, and in Thy strength do Thou judge me. O 
God, hearken unto my prayer, give ear unto the words of my mouth. For 
strangers are risen up against me, and mighty men have sought after my soul 
and have not set God before themselves. For behold, God helpeth me, and the 
Lord is the protector of my soul. He will bring evils upon mine enemies. Utterly 
to destroy them by Thy truth. Willingly shall I sacrifice unto Thee, I will confess 
Thy name, O Lord, for it is good. For out of every affliction hast Thou 
delivered me, and mine eye hath looked down upon mine enemies. 
PSALM 139  
Rescue me, O Lord, from the evil man; from the unjust man deliver me. 
who have devised injustice in their heart; all the day long have they arrayed 
themselves for wars. They have whetted their tongue like that of a serpent; the 
venom of asps is under their lips. Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the 
sinner; rescue me from unjust men who have devised to undermine my steps. 
The proud have hid a snare for me, and with cords have they spread a snare for 
my feet; stumbling-blocks near the paths have they set for me. I said unto the 
Lord: Thou art my God; give ear, O Lord, unto the voice of my supplication. 
Lord, O Lord, Thou strength of my salvation, Thou hast overshadowed my 
head in the day of battle. Because of my desire, O Lord, give me not up unto 
the sinner. They have taken counsel against me; forsake me not, lest they should 
be exalted. As for the head of those that encircle me, the mischief of their lips 
shall cover them. Coals shall fall upon them, in fire shalt Thou cast them down, 
and they shall not stand in afflictions. A babbling man shall not prosper on the 
earth; evils shall hunt an unjust man to his destruction. I know that the Lord 
will maintain the cause of the poor and the justice of the paupers. Surely the 
righteous shall confess Thy name, and the upright shall dwell in Thy presence.  
PSALM 90. 
He that dwelleth in the help of the Most High shall abide in the shelter of 
the God of heaven. He shall say unto the Lord: Thou art my helper and my 
refuge. He is my God, and I will hope in Him. For He shall deliver thee from 
the snare of the hunters and from every troubling word. With His shoulders 
shall He overshadow thee, and under His wings shalt thou have hope. With a 
shield will His truth encompass thee; thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by 

--- PAGE 17 ---
night, nor for the arrow that flieth by day. Nor for the thing that walketh in 
darkness, nor for the mishap and demon of noonday. A thousand shall fall at 
thy side, and ten thousands at thy right hand, but unto thee shall it not come 
nigh. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and thou shalt see the reward of 
sinners. For Thou, O Lord, art my hope. Thou madest the Most High thy 
refuge; No evils shall come nigh unto thee, and no scourge shall draw nigh unto 
thy dwelling. For He shall give His angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all 
thy ways. On their hands shall they bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy 
foot against a stone. Upon the asp and basilisk shalt thou tread, and thou shalt 
trample upon the lion and dragon. For he hath set his hope on Me, and I will 
deliver him, I will shelter him because he hath known my name. He shall cry 
unto me, and I will hearken unto him. I am with him in affliction, and I will 
rescue him and glorify him. With length of days will I satisfy him, and I will 
show him My salvation. 
Then: Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God 
(Thrice). Lord have mercy (Thrice). 
Glory ..., Troparion, in Tone II: 
Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth * O Christ God; * 
upon the Cross didst Thou stretch out Thy most pure hands, * gathering 
together all the nations, who cry aloud: ** O Lord, glory be to Thee. 
 Both now ..., the Theotokion: 
Seeing that we have no boldness on account of our many sins, do thou 
beseech Him that was born of thee, O Virgin Theotokos for the supplication of 
a mother availeth much to win the Master’s favor. Disdain not the prayers of 
sinners, O most pure one, for merciful and mighty to save is He Who deigned 
also to suffer for our sake. 
Then we chant the following Stichera, in Tone VIII: 
Thus sayeth the Lord unto the Jews: * “O My people, what have I done 
unto you? * Or wherein have I wearied you? * I gave light to your blind and 
cleansed your lepers, * I raised up the man who lay upon his bed. * O My 
people, what is it that have I done unto you, * and how have you repaid Me? * 
Instead of manna you give Me gall, * instead of water vinegar; * instead of 
loving Me, you nail Me to the Cross. * I can endure no more. * I shall call My 
Gentiles * and they shall glorify Me with the Father and the Spirit; ** and I shall 
bestow upon them life eternal.”  

--- PAGE 18 ---
Verse: They gave me gall for my food: * and for my thirst they gave me 
vinegar to drink. 
O ye lawgivers of Israel, Jews and Pharisees, * the company of the apostles 
cry out to you: * Behold the Temple that ye have destroyed; * behold the Lamb 
that ye have crucified. * Ye gave Him over to the tomb, * but by His own 
power He hath arisen. * Be not deceived, O ye Jews: * for this is He who saved 
you in the sea * and fed you in the wilderness. ** He is the Life and Light and 
Peace of the world. 
Verse: Save me, O God: * for the waters are come in unto my soul. 
Repeat: O lawgivers of Israel ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone V: 
Come, O ye Christ-bearing people, * let us see what Judas the traitor hath 
plotted * with the lawless priests against our Savior. * Today they judge the 
immortal Word guilty of death: * they deliver Him to Pilate and crucify Him on 
Golgotha. * And our Savior suffering these things, crieth aloud, saying: * 
“Father, Forgive them this sin, ** that the Gentiles may know My Resurrection 
from the dead.” 
Prokeimenon, in Tone IV: 
Prokeimenon: O Lord our Lord, how wonderful is Thy Name * in all the 
earth!  
Verse: For Thy magnificence is lifted high above the heavens. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (52:13 - 54:1) 
Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and 
be very high. As many were astonished at thee; his visage was so marred more 
than any man, and his form more than the sons of men: So shall he sprinkle 
many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him, for that which had not 
been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they 
consider. Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord 
revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of 
a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, 
there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of 
men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were our 
faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath 
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, 
smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he 

--- PAGE 19 ---
was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and 
with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have 
turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of 
us all. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he 
is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is 
dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. He was taken from prison and from 
judgment; and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the 
land of the living; for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he 
made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had 
done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord 
to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an 
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure 
of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and 
shall be satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. For 
he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the 
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out 
his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare 
the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. Sing, O barren, 
thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst 
not travail with child: For more are the children of the desolate than the 
children of the married wife, saith the Lord. 
Deacon: Wisdom!  
Reader: The Reading from the Epistle of the Holy Apostle Paul to the 
Hebrews. 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (2: 11-18) 
Brethren, both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: 
For which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Saying, I will declare 
thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto 
thee. And again, I will put my trust in him. And again, Behold I and the children 
which God hath given me. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of 
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through 
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil: And 
deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to 
bondage. For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on 
him the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made 

--- PAGE 20 ---
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in 
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For 
in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that 
are tempted. 
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel. 
Priest: Peace be unto all. 
Reader: And to thy spirit. 
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. Luke  
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE (23: 32-49) 
At that time, they led Jesus with two others to be put to death. And when 
they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him, 
and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said 
Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. And they parted 
his raiment, and cast lots. And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also 
with them derided him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be 
Christ, the chosen of God. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, 
and offering him vinegar, and saying, If thou be the king of the Jews, save 
thyself. And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and 
Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS. And one of the 
malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save 
thyself and us. But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear 
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we 
receive the due reward of our deeds; but this man hath done nothing amiss. 
And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy 
kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be 
with me in paradise. And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness 
over all the earth until the ninth hour. And the sun was darkened, and the veil 
of the temple was rent in the midst. And when Jesus had cried with a loud 
voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And having said 
thus, he gave up the ghost. Now when the centurion saw what was done, he 
glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man. And all the people 
that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote 
their breasts, and returned. And all his acquaintance, and the women that 
followed him from Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Then the reader immediately sayeth: Let Thy compassions quickly go before 
us, O Lord, for we are become exceedingly poor. Help us, O God our Savior, 
for the sake of the glory of Thy name. O Lord, deliver us and be gracious unto 
our sins for Thy name’s sake.  
Then Holy God ..., through Our Father ..., followed by:  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Come, and let us all sing the praises of Him who was crucified for us. * For 
when Mary beheld Him on the Tree she said: ** “Though Thou dost endure the 
Cross, yet Thou art my Son and God.” 
Lord have mercy (40 times), and the Prayer of the Hours:  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners; Who callest all mankind to salvation through the promise of good 
things to come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life 
toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, 
correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, 
evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided 
by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and to the knowledge of 
Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
More honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father Bless. 
Priest: By the prayers of our Holy Fathers ..., 
And the prayer of the sixth hour: 
O God and Lord of Hosts, and Maker of all Creation, Who by the tender 
compassion of Thy mercy which transcendeth comprehension, didst send down 
Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of our race, 
and by His precious Cross didst tear asunder the handwriting of our sins, and 
thereby didst triumph over the principalities and powers of darkness: Do Thou 
Thyself, O Master, Lover of mankind, accept also from us sinners these prayers 

--- PAGE 22 ---
of thanksgiving and entreaty, and deliver us from every destructive and dark 
transgression, and from all enemies, both visible and invisible, that seek to do us 
evil. Nail down our flesh with the fear of Thee, and incline not our hearts unto 
words or thoughts of evil, but pierce our souls with longing for Thee, so that 
ever looking to Thee, and being guided by Thy Light as we behold Thee, the 
unapproachable and everlasting Light, we may send up unceasing praise and 
thanksgiving unto Thee, the Beginningless Father, with Thine Only-begotten 
Son, and Thy most holy and good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and 
unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
 
Immediately there follows the ninth hour: 
 

--- PAGE 23 ---
NINTH HOUR 
Note: At the ninth Hour the deacon, or the priest if there be no deacon, 
censeth the Gospels, Iconostasis, the Church, and the people. 
O come, let us worship ..., (Thrice) 
PSALM 68  
Save me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul. I am stuck fast in 
the mire of the deep, and there is no sure standing. I am come into the deeps of 
the sea, and a tempest hath overwhelmed me. I am grown weary with crying, 
my throat is become hoarse; from my hoping in my God, mine eyes have failed 
me. They that hate me without a cause are multiplied more than the hairs of my 
head. Mine enemies are grown strong, they that persecute me unjustly; then did 
I restore that which I took not away. O God, Thou knowest my foolishness, 
and my transgressions are not hid from Thee. Let not them that wait on Thee 
be ashamed for my sake, O Lord, Thou Lord of hosts. Nor let them that seek 
after Thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel. Because for Thy sake I 
have borne reproach, shame hath covered my face. I am become a stranger 
unto my brethren, and an alien unto the sons of my mother. For the zeal of Thy 
house hath eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that reproach Thee are 
fallen on me. Yea, with fasting I covered my soul, and it was turned into a 
reproach for me. And I made sackcloth my clothing, and I became a proverb to 
them. And they prated against me, they that sit in the gates; and they made a 
song about me, they that drink wine. But as for me, with my prayer I cry unto 
Thee, O Lord, it is time for Thy good pleasure. O God, in the multitude of Thy 
mercy hearken unto me, in the truth of Thy salvation. Save me from the mire, 
that I be not stuck therein; let me be delivered from them that hate me and 
from the deeps of the waters. Let not the tempest of water overwhelm me, nor 
let the deep swallow me up, nor let the pit shut its mouth upon me. Hearken 
unto me, O Lord, for Thy mercy is good; according to the multitude of Thy 
compassions, look upon me. Turn not Thy countenance away from Thy 
servant, for I am afflicted; quickly hearken unto me. Attend unto my soul and 
deliver it; because of mine enemies, rescue me. For Thou knowest my reproach, 
my shame and my humiliation. Before Thee are all that afflict me; my soul hath 
awaited reproach and misery. And I waited for one that would grieve with me, 
but there was no one; and for them that would comfort me, but I found none. 
And they gave me gall for my food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to 
drink. Let their table before them be for a snare, for a recompense and for a 
stumbling-block. Let their eyes be darkened that they may not see, and their 
back do Thou continually bow down. Pour out upon them Thy wrath, and let 

--- PAGE 24 ---
the fury of Thy wrath take hold upon them. Let their habitation be made 
desolate, and in their tents let there be none to dwell. For they persecuted him 
whom Thou hast smitten, and to the pain of my wounds have they added. Add 
iniquity to their iniquity, and let them not enter into Thy righteousness. Let 
them be blotted out of the book of the living, and with the righteous let them 
not be written. Poor and in sorrow am I, may Thy salvation, O God, be quick 
to help me. I will praise the name of my God with an ode; I will magnify Him 
with praise. And this shall please God more than a young calf that hath horns 
and hooves. Let beggars behold it and be glad; seek after God, and your soul 
shall live. For the Lord hath hearkened unto the poor and hath not despised 
them that are fettered for His sake. Let the heavens and the earth praise Him, 
the sea and all the creeping things therein. For God will save Sion, and the cities 
of Judea shall be builded; and they shall dwell therein and inherit it. And the 
seed of Thy servants shall possess it, and they that love Thy name shall dwell 
therein. 
PSALM 69 
O God, be attentive unto helping me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Let 
them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul. Let them be turned 
back and brought to shame that desire evils against me. Let them be turned 
back straightway in shame that say unto me: Well done! Well done! Let them be 
glad and rejoice in Thee all that seek after Thee, O God, and let them that love 
Thy salvation say continually: The Lord be magnified. But as for me, I am poor 
and needy; O God, come unto mine aid. My helper and my deliverer art Thou, 
O Lord; make no long tarrying. 
PSALM 85. 
Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto me, for poor and needy am 
I. Preserve my soul, for I am holy; save Thy servant, O my God, that hopeth in 
Thee. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for unto Thee will I cry all the day long; 
make glad the soul of Thy servant, for unto Thee have I lifted up my soul. For 
Thou, O Lord, art good and gentle, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that 
call upon Thee. Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer, and attend unto the voice of 
my supplication. In the day of mine affliction have I cried unto Thee, for Thou 
hast heard me. There is none like unto Thee among the gods, O Lord, nor are 
there any works like unto Thy works. All the nations whom Thou hast made 
shall worship before Thee, O Lord, and shall glorify Thy name. For Thou art 
great and workest wonders; Thou alone art God. Guide me, O Lord, in Thy 
way, and I will walk in Thy truth; let my heart rejoice that I may fear Thy name. 
I will confess Thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify Thy 
name forever. For great is Thy mercy upon me, and Thou hast delivered my 

--- PAGE 25 ---
soul from the nethermost Hades. O God, transgressors have risen up against 
me, and the assembly of the mighty hath sought after my soul, and they have 
not set Thee before them. But Thou, O Lord my God, art compassionate and 
merciful, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy, and true. Look upon me and 
have mercy upon me; give Thy strength unto Thy servant, and save the son of 
Thy handmaiden. Work in me a sign unto good, and let them that hate me 
behold and be put to shame; for Thou, O Lord, hast helped me and comforted 
me. 
Then: Glory ..., Both now ..., Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to Thee, O God 
(Thrice). Lord have mercy (Thrice). 
Glory ..., Troparion, in Tone VIII: 
Upon seeing the Author of life hanging upon the Cross, * the thief said: “If 
it were not God incarnate * who is crucified with us, the sun would not have 
hid its rays * nor would the earth have quaked and trembled. ** But, do Thou 
O all-forbearing One, remember me in Thy Kingdom.” 
 Both now ..., the Theotokion: 
O Thou Who for our sake wast born of a Virgin, and didst suffer 
crucifixion, O Good One, and didst despoil death by death, and, as God, didst 
reveal the resurrection: Disdain not them which Thou hast fashioned with 
Thine hand; show forth Thy love for mankind, O Merciful One; accept the 
Theotokos who gave Thee birth, who intercedeth for us; and do Thou, our 
Savior, save a despairing people.  
Then we chant the following Stichera in Tone VII: 
Strange was the wonder, to see the Creator of heaven and earth * hanging 
upon the Cross. * The sun darkened and the day changed again into night, * 
and the earth gave up the bodies of the dead from within their tombs. ** Save 
us who with them worship Thee. 
Verse: They have parted my garments amongst themselves, * and for my 
vesture have they cast lots. 
In Tone II: When the transgressors nailed Thee, O Lord of glory, * onto the 
Cross, * Thou didst cry out to them: * “How have I grieved you? Or angered 
you? * Before Me, who hath delivered you from tribulations? * And how do ye 
now repay Me? * Ye have given Me evil for good: * in return for the pillar of 
fire, * ye have nailed Me onto the Cross; * in return for the cloud in the 
wilderness, * ye have dug a grave for Me. * Instead of manna, ye have given Me 
gall; * instead of water, ye have given Me vinegar to drink. * Henceforth I shall 
call the Gentiles, * and they shall glorify Me ** together with the Father and the 
Holy Spirit.” 

--- PAGE 26 ---
Verse: They gave Me gall for my food: * and for my thirst they gave me 
vinegar to drink. 
Repeat: When the transgressors ..., 
Glory ..., Both now ..., in Tone VI: 
Today He who hath suspended the earth upon the waters * is hung upon 
the Cross * He who is the King of the heavenly hosts * hath been arrayed in a 
crown of thorns. * He who wrapeth the heaven in clouds * hath now been 
wrapped in the purple of mockery. * He who in the river Jordan set Adam free 
* receiveth blows upon His face. * The Bridegroom of the Church is transﬁxed 
with nails. * The Son of the Virgin is pierced with a spear. * We venerate Thy 
Passion, O Christ * we venerate Thy Passion, O Christ * we venerate Thy 
Passion, O Christ ** Show us also Thy glorious Resurrection. 
Prokeimenon, in Tone VI: 
Prokeimenon: The fool hath said in his heart, * There is no God. 
Verse: There is none that doeth good, no not one. 
THE READING IS FROM THE PROPHECY OF JEREMIAH  
(11: 18-23; 12: 1-5, 9-11, 14-15) 
The Lord hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it; then thou shewedst 
me their doings. But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter; 
and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy 
the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, 
that his name may be no more remembered. But, O Lord of hosts, that judgest 
righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them; 
for unto thee have I revealed my cause. Therefore thus saith the Lord of the 
men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying; Prophesy not in the name of the 
Lord, that thou die not by our hand: Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, 
Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons 
and their daughters shall die by famine: And there shall be no remnant of them: 
for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation. 
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee of 
thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are 
all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou hast planted them, yea, they 
have taken root: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their 
mouth, and far from their reins. But thou, O Lord, knowest me; thou hast seen 
me, and tried mine heart toward thee; pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, 
and prepare them for the day of slaughter. How long shall the land mourn, and 

--- PAGE 27 ---
the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? 
the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said: He shall not see our 
last end. If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then 
how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou 
trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan? 
Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round about are against 
her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, come to devour. Many pastors 
have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they 
have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness. They have made it 
desolate, and being desolate it mourneth unto me; the whole land is made 
desolate, because no man layeth it to heart. Thus saith the Lord against all mine 
evil neighbors, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel 
to inherit. Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house 
of Judah from among them. And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked 
them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them 
again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land. 
Deacon: Wisdom!  
Reader: The Reading from the Epistle of the Holy Apostle Paul to the 
Hebrews. 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS (10: 19-31) 
Brethren; having therefore, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood 
of Jesus, By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through 
the veil, that is to say, his flesh; And having an high priest over the house of 
God; Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our 
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure 
water. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is 
faithful that promised;) And let us consider one another to provoke unto love 
and to good works: Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the 
manner of some is; but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see 
the day approaching. For if we sin willfully after that we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the 
adversaries. He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three 
witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought 
worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the 

--- PAGE 28 ---
blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath 
done despite unto the Spirit of grace? For we know him that hath said: 
Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, 
The Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the 
living God. 
Deacon: Wisdom, upright! Let us hear the Holy Gospel. 
Priest: Peace be unto all. 
Reader: And to thy spirit. 
Priest: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. John  
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Deacon: Let us attend. 
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN (18: 28 - 19: 37) 
At that time; they led Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment. And it 
was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should 
be defiled; but that they might eat the Passover. Pilate then went out unto them, 
and said, what accusation bring ye against this man? They answered and said 
unto him, if he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto 
thee. Then said Pilate unto them; Take ye him, and judge him according to your 
law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to 
death: That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying 
what death he should die. Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and 
called Jesus, and said unto him; Art thou the King of the Jews? Jesus answered 
him; Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate 
answered; Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered 
thee unto me; what hast thou done? Jesus answered; My kingdom is not of this 
world, if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I 
should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence. 
Pilate therefore said unto him: Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou 
sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into 
the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the 
truth heareth my voice. Pilate saith unto him, what is truth? And when he had 
said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no 
fault at all. But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the 
Passover; will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews? Then 
cried they all again, saying; Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a 
robber. Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. And the soldiers 

--- PAGE 29 ---
platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple 
robe, and said: Hail, King of the Jews! And they smote him with their hands. 
Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them: Behold, I bring him 
forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus 
forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto 
them: Behold the man! When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, 
they cried out, saying: Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye 
him, and crucify him, for I find no fault in him. The Jews answered him, we 
have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of 
God. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid; And 
went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto Jesus, whence art thou? But 
Jesus gave him no answer. Then saith Pilate unto him; Speakest thou not unto 
me? Knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to 
release thee? Jesus answered: Thou couldest have no power at all against me, 
except it were given thee from above, therefore he that delivered me unto thee 
hath the greater sin. And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him, but the 
Jews cried out, saying: If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar’s friend; 
whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar. When Pilate 
therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the 
judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, 
Gabbatha. And it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth 
hour. And he saith unto the Jews: Behold your King! But they cried out, Away 
with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them: Shall I crucify 
your King? The chief priests answered, we have no king but Caesar. Then 
delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and 
led him away. And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place 
of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha: Where they crucified him, 
and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilate 
wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And the writing was JESUS OF 
NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. This title then read many of the 
Jews, for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city. And it was 
written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. Then said the chief priests of the Jews 
to Pilate, write not: The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the 
Jews. Pilate answered, what I have written I have written. Then the soldiers, 
when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every 
soldier a part; and also his coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from 
the top throughout. They said therefore among themselvesL Let us not rend it, 

--- PAGE 30 ---
but cast lots for it, whose it shall be. That the scripture might be fulfilled, which 
saith: They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast 
lots. These things therefore the soldiers did. Now there stood by the cross of 
Jesus his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary 
Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, 
whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, woman, behold thy son! Then saith 
he to the disciple, behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her 
unto his own home. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now 
accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst. Now there was 
set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon 
hyssop, and put it to his mouth. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, 
he said: It is finished, and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost. The Jews 
therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain 
upon the cross on the Sabbath day, (for that Sabbath day was an high day,) 
besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken 
away. Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other 
which was crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he 
was dead already, they brake not his legs: But one of the soldiers with a spear 
pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. And he that 
saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he knoweth that he saith true, that 
ye might believe. For these things were done, that the scripture should be 
fulfilled: A bone of him shall not be broken. And again another scripture saith, 
They shall look on him whom they pierced. 
Choir: Glory to Thee O Lord, glory to Thee! 
Then the reader immediately sayeth: Deliver us not up utterly, for Thy holy 
name’s sake, and neither disannul Thou Thy covenant, and cause not Thy 
mercy to depart from us, for Abraham’s sake, Thy beloved; and for Isaac’s sake, 
Thy servant; and for Israel’s, Thy holy one.  
Then Holy God ..., through Our Father ..., followed by:  
Kontakion, in Tone VIII:  
Come, and let us all sing the praises of Him who was crucified for us. * For 
when Mary beheld Him on the Tree she said: ** “Though Thou dost endure the 
Cross, yet Thou art my Son and God.” 
Lord have mercy (40 times), and the Prayer of the Hours:  
Thou Who at all times and at every hour, in heaven and on earth, art 
worshipped and glorified, O Christ God, Who art long-suffering, plenteous in 

--- PAGE 31 ---
mercy, most compassionate, Who lovest the righteous and hast mercy on 
sinners; Who callest all mankind to salvation through the promise of good 
things to come: Receive, O Lord, our prayers at this hour, and guide our life 
toward Thy commandments. Sanctify our souls, make chaste our bodies, 
correct our thoughts, purify our intentions, and deliver us from every sorrow, 
evil, and ill. Compass us about with Thy holy angels, that, guarded and guided 
by their array, we may attain to the unity of the faith and to the knowledge of 
Thine unapproachable glory: For blessed art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice). 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
More honorable than the cherubim and beyond compare more glorious 
than the seraphim; who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word, the 
very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.  
Reader: In the name of the Lord Father Bless. 
Priest: O God be gracious unto us ..., 
And the prayer of the ninth hour: 
O Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, Who art long-suffering in the face of 
our transgressions, and Who hast brought us even unto this present hour, 
wherein Thou didst hang upon the life-giving tree, and didst make a way into 
paradise for the wise thief, and by death didst destroy death: Be gracious unto 
us sinners and Thine unworthy servants; for we have sinned and committed 
iniquity, and are not worthy to lift up our eyes and behold the height of heaven, 
for we have abandoned the way of Thy righteousness, and have walked in the 
desires of our hearts. But we beseech Thy boundless goodness: Spare us, O 
Lord, according to the multitude of Thy mercy and save us for Thy holy name’s 
sake; for our days were consumed in vanity. Rescue us from the hand of the 
adversary, and forgive us our sins, and mortify our carnal mind; that, putting 
aside the old man, we may be clad with the new, and live for Thee, our Master 
and Benefactor; and that thus by following in Thy commandments, we may 
attain to rest everlasting, wherein is the dwelling-place of all them that rejoice. 
For Thou art indeed the true joy and gladness of them that love Thee, O Christ 
our God, and unto Thee we send up glory, with Thy beginningless Father, and 
Thy Most-holy and good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and unto the 
ages of ages. Amen. 
Immediately there follows the abbreviated Typica (read not chanted) 
 

--- PAGE 32 ---
In Thy kingdom remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom. 
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.  
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.  
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be 
filled.  
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.  
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.  
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God.  
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is 
the kingdom of heaven.  
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say 
all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.  
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in the heavens. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
Remember us, O Lord, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom! 
Remember us, O Master, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom! 
Remember us, O Holy One, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom! 
The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of 
Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory! 
Verse: Come unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be 
ashamed. 
The choir of angels hymneth Thee, and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of 
Sabaoth! Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory! 
Glory ...,  
The choir of the holy angels and archangels, with all the heavenly hosts, 
hymneth Thee and saith: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of Sabaoth! Heaven and earth 
are full of Thy glory! 
Both now ..., 
I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth and 
of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
the Only-begotten, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true 
God of true God; begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by 
Whom all things were made; Who for us men and for our salvation came down 
from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, 

--- PAGE 33 ---
and became man; And was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered 
and was buried; And arose again on the third day according to the Scriptures; 
And ascended into the heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; And 
shall come again, with glory, to judge both the living and the dead; Whose 
kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life; 
Who proceedeth from the Father; Who together with the Father and the Son is 
worshipped and glorified; Who spake by the prophets. In One, Holy, Catholic, 
and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of sins. I look 
for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the age to come. Amen.  
Then, the prayer: 
Remit, pardon, forgive, O God, our offenses, both voluntary and 
involuntary, in deed and word, in knowledge and ignorance, by day and by 
night, in mind and thought; forgive us all things, for Thou art good and the 
Lover of mankind. 
Then, Our Father ..., 
Our Father, Who art in the Heavens, hallowed be Thy name, Thy kingdom 
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily 
bread, and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, and lead us not into 
temptation, but deliver us from the evil-one. 
Priest: For Thine is the Kingdom ..., 
The Kontakion: 
Come, and let us all sing the praises of Him who was crucified for us. For 
when Mary beheld Him on the Tree she said: “Though Thou dost endure the 
Cross, yet Thou art my Son and God.” 
Lord, have mercy! (40 times)  
And this prayer:  
O Most holy Trinity, the consubstantial dominion, the indivisible Kingdom, 
and cause of every Good: Show Thy good will even unto me a sinner; make 
steadfast my heart and grant it understanding, and take away mine every 
defilement; enlighten my mind that I may glorify, hymn, worship, and say: One 
is holy, One is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.  
Blessed be the name of the Lord from henceforth and for evermore. 
(Thrice)  
Glory ..., Both now ..., 
I will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall continually be in my mouth. 
In the Lord shall my soul be praised; let the meek hear and be glad. O magnify 
the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together. I sought the Lord, and 

--- PAGE 34 ---
He heard me, and delivered me from all my tribulations. Come unto Him, and 
be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed. This poor man cried, and 
the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his tribulations. The angel of the 
Lord will encamp round about them that fear Him, and will deliver them. O 
taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that hopeth in Him. O 
fear the Lord, all ye His saints; for there is no want to them that fear Him. Rich 
men have turned poor and gone hungry; but they that seek the Lord shall not 
be deprived of any good thing. Come ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach 
you the fear of the Lord. What man is there that desireth life, who loveth to see 
good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Turn 
away from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it. The eyes of the Lord 
are upon the righteous, and His ears are opened unto their supplication. The 
face of the Lord is against them that do evil, utterly to destroy the remembrance 
of them from the earth. The righteous cried, and the Lord heard them, and He 
delivered them out of all their tribulations. The Lord is nigh unto them that are 
of a contrite heart, and He will save the humble of spirit. Many are the 
tribulations of the righteous, and the Lord shall deliver them out of them all. 
The Lord keepeth all their bones, not one of them shall be broken. The death 
of sinners is evil, and they that hate the righteous shall do wrong. The Lord will 
redeem the souls of His servants, and none of them will do wrong that hope in 
Him.  
Priest: Wisdom!  
Choir 1: It is truly meet to bless thee, the Theotokos, * ever-blessed and 
most blameless, and Mother of Our God.  
Priest: Most holy Theotokos save us. 
Choir 2: More honorable than the Cherubim, * and beyond compare more 
glorious than the Seraphim, * who without corruption gavest birth to God the 
Word, * the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify. 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God our hope, glory be to Thee.  
Choir 1 & 2: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. Lord have mercy (Thrice), 
Father (Master), Bless.  
At the Dismissal the priest saith:  
Priest: May Christ our true God, Who for the salvation of the world 
endured spitting, scourging, buffeting, the Cross, and death ..., 
 

--- PAGE 35 ---
Note: On Great Friday there is no celebration of the Liturgy neither the 
complete Liturgy nor that of the Presanctified. No meal is served in the 
refectory, and on this day of the Crucifixion we eat nothing, according to the 
words which the Lord spoke to the Pharisees: “The days will come, when the 
Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast (Matthew 9: 15). 
But as frequently happens, and one is weak and/or old, and cannot keep the 
fast, let him be given bread and water after sunset. 
