--- PAGE 1 ---
HOLY AND GREAT SATURDAY 
VESPERAL LITURGY OF ST. BASIL 
The service begineth about the tenth hour of the day (four o’clock in the 
afternoon). For the first part of the service the clergy wear dark vestments. 
After the Psalm of introduction (Psalm 103) and the great Litany, Then: “Lord, 
I have cried ...,” 8 Stichera: 4 of the Resurrection from the Oktoechos; and then 
3 of the day, the first of these being repeated. 
In Tone I: 
Verse: Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, O Lord; * O Lord, hear 
my voice. 
Receive our evening prayers, * O Holy Lord, * and grant us remission of 
sins; * because Thou alone hast revealed ** the Resurrection to the world.  
Verse: Let Thine ears be attentive * to the voice of my supplication. 
Go around Zion, O ye peoples, * and encompass her, * and give glory to 
him who in her midst hath arisen from the dead; * for he is our God, ** and 
hath delivered us from our iniquities. 
Verse: If Thou shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, O Lord, who shall 
stand? * For with Thee there is forgiveness. 
Come O ye peoples, * let us hymn and worship Christ * glorifying his 
Resurrection from the dead: * for he is our God, ** who hath redeemed the 
world from the deception of the adversary. 
Verse: For Thy name’s sake have I patiently waited for Thee, O Lord; 
my soul hath patiently waited for Thy word, * my soul hath hoped in the 
Lord. 
By Thy Passion, O Christ, * we have been set free from passions, * and by 
Thy Resurrection we have been delivered from corruption. ** O Lord, glory be 
to thee. 
 In Tone VIII: 
Verse: From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch * 
let Israel hope in the Lord. 
Today Hades doth groan and cry aloud: * “It had been better for me had I 
not accepted Mary’s Son, * for He hath come to me and destroyed my power; * 
He hath shattered the gates of brass, * and as God He hath raised up the souls 
that once I held.” * Glory be to Thy Cross, O Lord, ** and to Thy 
Resurrection. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Verse: For with the Lord there is mercy, and with Him is plenteous 
redemption; * and He shall redeem Israel out of all his iniquities. 
Repeat: Today Hades doth groan and cry aloud: * it had been better ..., 
Verse: O praise the Lord, all ye nations; * praise Him, all ye peoples. 
Today Hades doth groan and cry aloud: * “My power hath been destroyed. 
* I accepted a mortal man as one of the dead; * yet I cannot keep Him prisoner, 
* and with Him I shall lose all those whom I once ruled. * I held in my power 
the dead from all ages; * but behold, He is raising them all.” * Glory be to Thy 
Cross, O Lord, ** and to Thy Resurrection. 
Verse: For He hath made His mercy to prevail over us, * and the truth of 
the Lord abideth forever. 
Today Hades doth groan and cry aloud: * “My dominion hath been 
swallowed up; * the Shepherd hath been crucified * and He hath raised Adam. * 
I am deprived of those whom I once ruled; * in my strength I devoured them, * 
but now I have cast them forth. * He who hath been crucified hath emptied the 
tombs; * the power of death hath no more strength.” * Glory be to Thy Cross, 
O Lord, ** and to Thy Resurrection. 
Glory ..., in Tone VI:  
Moses the great mystically foretold this present day, saying: * “And God 
blessed the seventh day.” * For this is the blessed Sabbath, * this is the day of 
rest, * on which the only-begotten Son of God rested from all His works. * 
Suffering death in accordance with the plan of salvation, * He kept the Sabbath 
in the flesh; * and returning to what He was through His Resurrection, * He 
hath granted us eternal life, ** for He alone is good and the Lover of mankind. 
 Both now ..., Theotokion, in Tone I: 
Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, * who sprang forth from mankind and 
who gave birth to the Master, * the Portal of heaven, Mary the Virgin, * the 
hymn of the Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful; * for she hath been 
revealed as the Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. * By destroying the middle 
wall, she hath brought forth peace, * and opened wide the Kingdom. * 
Therefore, holding fast to her as a firm confirmation of the faith, * we have as 
our champion the Lord born from her. * Take courage therefore, take courage, 
O ye people of God; ** for as the Invincible one he shall conquer our 
adversaries. 
Entrance with the Gospel; “O joyous Light ...,” 

--- PAGE 3 ---
There is no Prokeimenon, but we begin at once the reading of the lessons: 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (1:1-13) 
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was 
without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the 
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be 
light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God 
divided the light from the darkness. And God called the light Day, and the 
darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. 
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it 
divide the waters from the waters. And God made the firmament, and divided 
the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above 
the firmament: and it was so. And God called the firmament Heaven. And the 
evening and the morning were the second day. And God said, Let the waters 
under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land 
appear: and it was so. And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering 
together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good. And God 
said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree 
yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so. 
And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the 
tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it 
was good. And the evening and the morning were the third day. 
THE READING IS FROM PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (60 1-16) 
Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon 
thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the 
people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon 
thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy 
rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves 
together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters 
shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine 
heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be 
converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. The 
multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all 
they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and incense; and they shall 
shew forth the praises of the Lord. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered 
together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall 
come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows? Surely the 
isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from 
far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, 
and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee. And the sons of 
strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in 
my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. Therefore 
thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that 
men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be 
brought. For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, 
those nations shall be utterly wasted. The glory of Lebanon shall come unto 
thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my 
sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious. The sons also of them 
that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee 
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee; The 
city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. Whereas thou has been 
forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an 
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shalt also suck the milk of 
the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the 
Lord am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF EXODUS (12 1-11) 
And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt saying, This 
month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of 
the year to you. Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth 
day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the 
house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: And if the household be too little 
for the lamb, let him and his neighbor next unto his house take it according to 
the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your 
count for the lamb. Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: 
ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: And ye shall keep it up 
until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the 
congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening. And they shall take of the 
blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the 
houses, wherein they shall eat it. And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast 
with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it. Eat not 
of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, 
and with the pertinence thereof. And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the 
morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with 

--- PAGE 5 ---
fire. And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and 
your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is the LORD’s Passover. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF JONAH (1:1 - 4:11) 
Now the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying, 
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is 
come up before me. But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence 
of the Lord, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so 
he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish 
from the presence of the Lord. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, 
and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be 
broken. Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and 
cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. But 
Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep. 
So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, what meanest thou, O 
sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we 
perish not. And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, 
that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and 
the lot fell upon Jonah. Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for 
whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine occupation? and whence comest 
thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou? And he said unto them, 
I am an Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the 
sea and the dry land. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him. 
Why hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of 
the Lord, because he had told them. Then said they unto him, what shall we do 
unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was 
tempestuous. And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the 
sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great 
tempest is upon you. Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land; 
but they could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them. 
Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, we beseech thee, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, let us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent 
blood: for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased thee. So they look up Jonah, 
and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging. Then the 
men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and 
made vows. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And 
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights. Then Jonah 
prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fish’s belly, And said, I cried by reason 

--- PAGE 6 ---
of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried 
I, and thou heardest my voice. For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the 
midst of the seas; and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy 
waves passed over me. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look 
again toward thy holy temple. The waters compassed me about, even to the 
soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my 
head. I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was 
about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord 
my God. When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord: and my 
prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple. They that observe lying 
vanities forsake their own mercy. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of 
thanksgiving; I will pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the Lord. And the 
Lord spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. And the 
word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying, Arise, go unto 
Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. So 
Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord. Now 
Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days’ journey. And Jonah began to 
enter into the city a day’s journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and 
Nineveh shall be overthrown. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and 
proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the 
least of them. For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his 
throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat 
in ashes. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by 
the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd 
nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water: But let man and 
beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn 
every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. Who 
can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we 
perish not? And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and 
God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he 
did it not. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. And he 
prayed unto the Lord, and said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, 
when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I 
knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great 
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech 
thee, my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live. Then said the 
Lord, Doest thou well to be angry? So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on 

--- PAGE 7 ---
the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the 
shadow, till he might see what would become of the city. And the Lord God 
prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a 
shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding 
glad of the gourd. But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next 
day, and it smote the gourd that it withered. And it came to pass, when the sun 
did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the 
head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, It is better 
for me to die than to live. And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry 
for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death. Then said 
the Lord, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not labored, 
neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night: And 
should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more then six-score 
thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left 
hand; and also much cattle? 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF JOSHUA (5 10-15) 
The children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover on the 
fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho. And they did eat 
of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes, 
and parched corn in the selfsame day. And the manna ceased on the morrow 
after they had eaten of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of 
Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that 
year. And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes 
and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword 
drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for 
us, or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the 
Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, 
and said unto him, what saith my Lord unto his servant? And the captain of the 
Lord’s host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place 
whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF EXODUS (13 20-15: 19) 
The Israelites took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in 
the edge of the wilderness. And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of 
a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; 
to go by day and night: He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the 
pillar of fire by night, from before the people. And the Lord spake unto Moses, 

--- PAGE 8 ---
saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before 
Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before it shall 
ye encamp by the sea. For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are 
entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in. And I will harden 
Pharaoh’s heart, that he shall follow after them; and I will be honored upon 
Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the 
Lord. And they did so. And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: 
and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and 
they said, why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us? 
And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him: And he took six 
hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every 
one of them. And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and 
he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with 
an high hand. But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots 
of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by 
the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon. And when Pharaoh drew nigh, 
the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched 
after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto 
the Lord. And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, 
hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus 
with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt? Is not this the word that we did tell thee 
in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been 
better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness. 
And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation 
of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have 
seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. The Lord shall fight for 
you, and ye shall hold your peace. And the Lord said unto Moses, wherefore 
criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward: But 
lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and 
the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea. And 
I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: 
and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his 
chariots, and upon his horsemen. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the 
Lord, when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and 
upon his horsemen. And the angel of God, which went before the camp of 
Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from 
before their face, and stood behind them: And it came between the camp of the 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but 
it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the 
night. And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord caused the 
sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, 
and the waters were divided. And the children of Israel went into the midst of 
the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their 
right hand, and on their left. And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them 
to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his 
horsemen. And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the Lord looked 
unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and 
troubled the host of the Egyptians, And took off their chariot wheels, that they 
drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of 
Israel; for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians. And the Lord said 
unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come 
again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen. And 
Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his 
strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the 
Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea. And the waters returned, 
and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that 
came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them. But 
the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the 
waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left. Thus the 
Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the 
Egyptians dead upon the sea shore. And Israel saw that great work which the 
Lord did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the Lord, and believed the 
Lord, and his servant Moses. Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this 
song unto the Lord, and spake, saying: 
Reader: I will sing unto the Lord,  
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. Let us sing 
unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my 
salvation: Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  

--- PAGE 10 ---
Reader: He is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father’s 
God, and I will exalt him. Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name. Pharaoh’s 
chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: His chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea. Let us sing 
unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The depths have covered them; they sank into the bottom as a 
stone. Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: Let us 
sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy. And 
in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose 
up against thee: Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble. 
And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, Let 
us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were 
congealed in the heart of the sea. Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the 
spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my 
hand shall destroy them. Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them; they sank 
as lead in the mighty waters. Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  

--- PAGE 11 ---
Reader: Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? who is like 
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? Let us sing 
unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them. 
Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: 
Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation. 
The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the 
inhabitants of Palestine: Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of 
Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan 
shall melt away. Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine 
arm they shall be as still as a stone; Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over, 
which thou hast purchased: Let us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of 
thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to 
dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established: Let 
us sing unto the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. For the horse of Pharaoh 
went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the 
Lord brought again the waters of the sea upon them; Let us sing unto 
the Lord 
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: But the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the 
sea. Let us sing unto the Lord 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Choir: For gloriously hath he been glorified:  
Reader: Glory ...,  
Choir: Let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously hath he been glorified: 
Reader: Both now ...,  
Choir: Let us sing unto the Lord. 
Reader: For gloriously hath he been glorified: 
Then we continue with the reading of the lessons: 
THE READING IS FROM PROPHECY OF ZEPHANIAH (3:8-15) 
Thus saith the Lord: Therefore wait ye upon me, until the day that I rise up 
to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble 
the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: 
for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. For then will I 
turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the 
Lord, to serve him with one consent. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my 
suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering. In that 
day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed 
against me: for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice 
in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy mountain. I 
will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall 
trust in the name of the Lord. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor 
speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they 
shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid. Sing, O daughter of 
Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of 
Jerusalem. The Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine 
enemy: the king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not 
see evil any more. 
THE READING IS FROM THE THIRD BOOK OF KINGS (17:8-24) 
The word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Arise, get thee to Zarephath, 
which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a 
widow woman there to sustain thee. So he arose and went to Zarephath. And 
when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the widow woman was there 
gathering of sticks: and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little 
water in a vessel, that I may drink. And as she was going to fetch it, he called to 
her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand. And she 
said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a 

--- PAGE 13 ---
barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I 
may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. And 
Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof 
a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son. 
For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, 
neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon 
the earth. And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and 
he, and her house, did eat many days. And the barrel of meal wasted not, 
neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he 
spake by Elijah. And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the 
woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that 
there was no breath left in him. And she said unto Elijah, what have I to do 
with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to 
remembrance, and to slay my son? And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And 
he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, 
and laid him upon his own bed. And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord 
my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by 
slaying her son? And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried 
unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child’s soul come 
into him again. And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child 
came into him again, and he revived. And Elijah took the child, and brought 
him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his 
mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth. And the woman said to Elijah, Now 
by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy 
mouth is truth. 
THE READING IS FROM PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (61:10-62:5) 
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he 
hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the 
robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as 
a bride adorneth herself with her jewels. For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, 
and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the 
Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the 
nations. For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will 
not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation 
thereof as a lamp that burneth. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, 
and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the 
mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand 

--- PAGE 14 ---
of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. Thou shalt no more be 
termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou 
shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord delighteth in thee, 
and thy land shall be married. For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy 
sons marry thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy 
Lord rejoice over thee. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF GENESIS (22 1-18) 
It came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said 
unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am. And he said, Take now thy 
son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of 
Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains 
which I will tell thee of. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and 
saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and 
clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of 
which God had told him. Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and 
saw the place afar off. And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here 
with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to 
you. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac 
his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of 
them together. And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: 
and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but 
where is the lamb for a burnt offering? And Abraham said, My son, God will 
provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them 
together. And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham 
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and 
laid him on the altar upon the wood. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, 
and took the knife to slay his son. And the angel of the Lord called unto him 
out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And he 
said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for 
now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine 
only son from me. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold 
behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took 
the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son. And 
Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In 
the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. And the angel of the Lord called unto 
Abraham out of heaven the second time, And said, By myself have I sworn, 
saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy 

--- PAGE 15 ---
son, thine only son: That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will 
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the 
sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; And in thy seed 
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. 
THE READING IS FROM PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (61:1-9) 
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me 
to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the 
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound; To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, 
and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn; To appoint 
unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of 
joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they 
might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might 
be glorified. And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former 
desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many 
generations. And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the 
alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers. But ye shall be named the 
Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the 
riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves. For your 
shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: 
therefore in their land they shall possess the double: everlasting joy shall be 
unto them. For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and 
I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with 
them. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring 
among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the 
seed which the Lord hath blessed. 
THE READING IS FROM THE FOURTH BOOK OF KINGS (4 8-37) 
It fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman; 
and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, 
he turned in thither to eat bread. And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I 
perceive that this is an holy man of God, which passeth by us continually. Let 
us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let us set for him there a 
bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh 
to us, that he shall turn in thither. And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and 
he turned into the chamber, and lay there. And he said to Gehazi his servant, 
Call this Shunammite. And when he had called her, she stood before him. And 

--- PAGE 16 ---
he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, thou hast been careful for us with 
all this care; what is to be done for thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the 
king, or to the captain of the host? And she answered, I dwell among mine own 
people. And he said, what then is to be done for her? And Gehazi answered, 
Verily she hath no child, and her husband is old. And he said, Call her. And 
when he had called her, she stood in the door. And he said, About this season, 
according to the time of life, thou shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, my 
lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid. And the woman 
conceived, and bare a son at that season that Elisha had said unto her, 
according to the time of life. And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, 
that he went out to his father to the reapers. And he said unto his father, My 
head, my head. And he said to a lad, Carry him to his mother. And when he had 
taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and 
then died. And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and 
shut the door upon him, and went out. And she called unto her husband, and 
said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the young men, and one of the asses, that I 
may run to the man of God, and come again. And he said, wherefore wilt thou 
go to him to day? it is neither new moon, nor Sabbath. And she said, It shall be 
well. Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive, and go forward; 
slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee. So she went and came unto the 
man of God to mount Carmel. And it came to pass, when the man of God saw 
her afar off, that he said to Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is that 
Shunammite: Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with 
thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she answered, It 
is well: And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught him by 
the feet: but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And the man of God said, 
Let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her: and the Lord hath hid it from 
me, and hath not told me. Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I 
not say, Do not deceive me? Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and 
take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man, salute him 
not; and if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay my staff upon the face 
of the child. And the mother of the child said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy 
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her. And Gehazi 
passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face of the child; but there 
was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore he went again to meet him, and told 
him, saying, The child is not awaked. And when Elisha was come into the 
house, behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed. He went in therefore, 

--- PAGE 17 ---
and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the Lord. And he went 
up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes 
upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands: and stretched himself upon the 
child; and the flesh of the child waxed warm. Then he returned, and walked in 
the house to and fro; and went up, and stretched himself upon him: and the 
child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes. And he called Gehazi, 
and said, Call this Shunammite. So he called her. And when she was come in 
unto him, he said, Take up thy son. Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and 
bowed herself to the ground, and took up her son, and went out. 
THE READING IS FROM PROPHECY OF ISAIAH (63:11 - 64:5)  
Thus saith the Lord: Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with 
the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? That 
led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water 
before them, to make himself an everlasting name? That led them through the 
deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? As a beast 
goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest: so didst 
thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. Look down from heaven, 
and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy 
zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward 
me? are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be 
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our father, our 
redeemer; thy name is from everlasting. O Lord, why hast thou made us to err 
from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants’ 
sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. The people of thy holiness have possessed 
it but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary. We are 
thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not called by thy name. Oh 
that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the 
mountains might flow down at thy presence, As when the melting fire burneth, 
the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine 
adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence! When thou didst 
terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains 
flowed down at thy presence. For since the beginning of the world men have 
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside 
thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him. Thou meetest him 
that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways:  
 

--- PAGE 18 ---
THE READING IS FROM PROPHECY OF JEREMIAH (31:31-34) 
Thus saith the Lord: Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make 
a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not 
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took 
them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant 
they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord: But this shall 
be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith 
the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and 
will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more 
every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: 
for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, 
saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no 
more. 
THE READING IS FROM THE BOOK OF DANIEL (3:1-23)  
Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was 
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of 
Dura, in the province of Babylon. Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to 
gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the 
treasurers, the counselors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to 
come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set 
up. Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the treasurers, the 
counselors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered 
together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set 
up; and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up. Then an 
herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, 
That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, 
dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image 
that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up: And whoso falleth not down and 
worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery 
furnace. Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the 
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of music, all the people, the 
nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image that 
Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up. Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans 
came near, and accused the Jews. They spake and said to the king 
Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever. Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that 
every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, 
and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, shall fall down and worship the golden 

--- PAGE 19 ---
image: And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast 
into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. There are certain Jews whom thou 
hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego; these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, 
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. Then Nebuchadnezzar in 
his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. 
Then they brought these men before the king. Nebuchadnezzar spake and said 
unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my 
gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up? Now if ye be ready 
that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, 
and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image which 
I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the 
midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you out 
of my hands? Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the 
king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it 
be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery 
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known 
unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden 
image which thou hast set up. Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the 
form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: 
therefore he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one 
seven times more than it was wont to be heated. And he commanded the most 
mighty men that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, 
and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace. Then these men were bound in 
their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast 
into the midst of the burning fiery furnace. Therefore because the king’s 
commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flames of the fire 
slew those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. And these 
three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst 
of the burning fiery furnace. And they walked in the midst of the fire, praising 
God, and blessing the Lord. Then Azarias stood up, and prayed on this manner; 
and opening his mouth in the midst of the fire said: Blessed art Thou in the 
firmament of heaven; and to be praised and exalted above all for ever: And they 
walked in the midst of the fire, praising God, and blessing the Lord. Then 
Azarias stood up, and prayed on this manner; and opening his mouth in the 
midst of the fire said, Blessed art thou, O Lord God of our fathers: thy name is 
worthy to be praised and glorified for evermore: For thou art righteous in all 

--- PAGE 20 ---
the things that thou hast done to us: yea, true are all thy works, thy ways are 
right, and all thy judgments truth. In all the things that thou hast brought upon 
us, and upon the holy city of our fathers, even Jerusalem, thou hast executed 
true judgment: for according to truth and judgment didst thou bring all these 
things upon us because of our sins. For we have sinned and committed iniquity, 
departing from thee. In all things have we trespassed, and not obeyed thy 
commandments, nor kept them, neither done as thou hast commanded us, that 
it might go well with us. Wherefore all that thou hast brought upon us, and 
every thing that thou hast done to us, thou hast done in true judgment. And 
thou didst deliver us into the hands of lawless enemies, most hateful forsakers 
of God, and to an unjust king, and the most wicked in all the world. And now 
we cannot open our mouths, we are become a shame and reproach to thy 
servants; and to them that worship thee. Yet deliver us not up wholly, for thy 
name’s sake, neither disannul thou thy covenant: And cause not thy mercy to 
depart from us, for thy beloved Abraham’s sake, for thy servant Issac”s sake, 
and for thy holy Israel’s sake; To whom thou hast spoken and promised, that 
thou wouldest multiply their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that 
lieth upon the seashore. For we, O Lord, are become less than any nation, and 
be kept under this day in all the world because of our sins. Neither is there at 
this time prince, or prophet, or leader, or burnt offering, or sacrifice, or 
oblation, or incense, or place to sacrifice before thee, and to find mercy. 
Nevertheless in a contrite heart and an humble spirit let us be accepted. Like as 
in the burnt offerings of rams and bullocks, and like as in ten thousands of fat 
lambs: so let our sacrifice be in thy sight this day, and grant that we may wholly 
go after thee: for they shall not be confounded that put their trust in thee. And 
now we follow thee with all our heart, we fear thee, and seek thy face. Put us 
not to shame: but deal with us after thy tender compassion, and according to 
the multitude of thy mercies. Deliver us also according to thy marvellous works, 
and give glory to thy name, O Lord: and let all them that do thy servants hurt 
be ashamed; And let them be confounded in all their power and might, and let 
their strength be broken; And let them know that thou art God, the only God, 
and glorious over the whole world. And the king’s servants, that put them in, 
ceased not to make the oven hot with rosin, pitch, tow, and small wood; So that 
the flame streamed forth above the furnace forty and nine cubits. And it passed 
through, and burned those Chaldeans it found about the furnace. But the angel 
of the Lord came down into the oven together with Azarias and his fellows, and 
smote the flame of the fire out of the oven; And made the midst of the furnace 

--- PAGE 21 ---
as it had been a moist whistling wind, so that the fire touched them not at all, 
neither hurt nor troubled them. Then the three, as out of one mouth, praised, 
glorified, and blessed, God in the furnace, saying, Blessed art thou, O Lord God 
of our fathers: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever. And blessed is 
thy glorious and holy name: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever. 
Blessed art thou in the temple of thine holy glory: and to be praised and 
glorified above all for ever. Blessed art thou that beholdest the depths, and 
sittest upon the cherubims: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever. 
Blessed art thou on the glorious throne of thy kingdom: and to be praised and 
glorified above all for ever. Blessed art thou in the firmament of heaven: and 
above all to be praised and glorified for ever: 
The Song of the Three Children (Verses 1-66): 
In Tone VI: 
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all for ever. 
Reader: O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. 
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord :  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O all ye waters that be above the heaven,  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye sun and moon, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O every shower and dew, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O all ye winds, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye fire and heat, bless ye the Lord:  

--- PAGE 22 ---
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye winter and summer, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye dews and storms of snow, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye nights and days, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye light and darkness, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye ice and cold, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye frost and snow, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye lightnings and clouds, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O let the earth bless the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye mountains and little hills, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O all ye things that grow in the earth, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye mountains, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye seas and rivers, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O all ye fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord:  

--- PAGE 23 ---
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O Israel, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord:  
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: O ye apostles, prophets and martyrs of the Lord, bless ye the 
Lord. 
Choir: Praise the Lord and. exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: We bless the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 
Choir: We praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: Both now, and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. 
Choir: Praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Reader: We praise, bless and worship the Lord. 
Choir: We praise the Lord and exalt Him above all throughout all ages: 
Then followeth the Small Litany. 
Instead of the Trisagion we chant: 
Choir: As many of you as were baptized into Christ, ** have put on 
Christ. Alleluia.  
Prokeimenon, in Tone V: 
Prokeimenon: Let all the earth worship Thee, and chant unto Thee * let 
them chant unto Thy Name, O most High. 
Verse: Shout with jubilation unto the Lord, all the earth; chant ye unto 
His Name. 
 

--- PAGE 24 ---
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS (6:3-11) 
Brethren: Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by 
baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory 
of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have 
been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the 
likeness of his resurrection: Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with 
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not 
serve sin. For he that is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, 
we believe that we shall also live with him: Knowing that Christ being raised 
from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him. For in 
that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. 
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto 
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
We do not chant Alleluia, but in its place we chant the following verses: 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: * for Thou shalt have an 
inheritance among all the nations.  
Verse: God stood in the congregation of the gods: and in the midst He 
shall stand out among gods. 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: ...,  
Verse: How long will ye judge unrighteously: and accept the person of 
sinners? 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: ...,  
Verse: Judge for the orphan and the poor: do justice to the humble and 
the pauper. 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: ...,  
Verse: Rescue the poor man and the needy: from the hand of the sinner 
deliver him. 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: ...,  
 Verse: They have not known, nor understood, that they walk in 
darkness: let all the foundations of the earth be shaken. 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: ...,  
Verse: I said: ye are gods, and all of you are all the sons of the most 
High: but like men ye die, and like one of the rulers ye fall. 
Choir: Arise, O God, judge the earth: ...,  

--- PAGE 25 ---
Note: While this is being sung, the Royal Doors are closed and the 
curtain is drawn. The clergy change from dark to white vestments, and 
the hangings and covers in the sanctuary and the rest of the church are 
likewise changed from dark to white.  
GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (28: 1-20) 
In the evening of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of 
the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulcher. And, 
behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from 
heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His 
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow: And for fear of 
him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men. And the angel answered 
and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was 
crucified. He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where 
the Lord lay. And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; 
and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have 
told you. And they departed quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy; 
and did run to bring his disciples word. And as they went to tell his disciples, 
behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the 
feet, and worshipped him. Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my 
brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. Now when they 
were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed unto the 
chief priests all the things that were done. And when they were assembled with 
the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, 
Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept. 
And if this come to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him, and secure you. 
So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is 
commonly reported among the Jews until this day. Then the eleven disciples 
went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them. And 
when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted. And Jesus came 
and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. 
Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you always, even 
unto the end of the world. Amen. 
We continue with the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great: 
 

--- PAGE 26 ---
In place of the Cherubic Hymn, we chant the following: 
In Tone V: 
Let all mortal flesh keep silence, * and stand with fear and trembling; * and 
let it take no thought for any earthly thing. * For the King of Kings and Lord of 
Lords * draweth near to be sacrificed * and given as food to the faithful. * 
Before Him go the choirs of angels * with all the principalities and powers, * 
the many-eyed cherubim and the six-winged seraphim, * who cover their faces 
as they sing this hymn: ** Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. (Repeat as needed) 
In place of It is truly meet ..., we chant the Irmos of ODE IX: 
Irmos: Weep not for Me, O Mother, * beholding in the tomb the Son 
Whom thou hast conceived * without seed in the womb; * for I shall arise 
and shall be glorified, * and as God I shall exalt with glory unceasing, * 
those that with faith and love magnify thee. 
Communion Verse: And the Lord awoke, as one that sleepeth: He hath 
arisen and hath saved us. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. 
Note: At the end of the Liturgy a table is placed in the centre of the 
church and on it are set five loaves and wine (but not oil: for on this 
Saturday, alone among all the Saturdays of the year, oil is not permitted). 
After the prayer behind the Ambon the deacon says: Let us pray to the 
Lord, and the priest blesses the bread and wine with the usual prayer 
used at the Vigil Service:  
 
Priest: O Lord Jesus Christ our God ..., (but omitting the reference to 
oil). 
Then: Blessed be the Name of the Lord ..., followed by the conclusion of 
the Liturgy. The priest useth the Dismissal as on Sundays: 
Priest: May He who rose from the dead, Christ our true God ..., 
After receiving the antidoron, the faithful also partake from the bread 
and wine that have been blessed. 
In previous times, after the completion of the Liturgy - which ended around 
the second hour of the night (eight o’clock in the evening) - the faithful did not 
leave the church; but after receiving the blessed bread and wine, together with 
several dates or figs, they remained in their places. The reading of the Acts of 
the Apostles commenced at once, and continued without interruption until the 
commencement of the Midnight Office. 
