--- PAGE 1 ---
THE MIDNIGHT OFFICE 
MIDNIGHT OFFICE FOR PASCHA BEGINNETH AT 11:30 P.M. 
Priest: Blessed is our God, always..., Reader: Glory to Thee ..., Heavenly 
King ..., Trisagion ..., through Our Father ..., Priest: For thine is the Kingdom 
..., Lord, have mercy (12), Glory ..., Both now ..., O Come let us worship ..., 
Psalm 50: 
Have mercy on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy; and according 
to the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgression. Wash me 
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know mine 
iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Against Thee only have I sinned and 
done this evil before Thee, that Thou mightest be justified in Thy words, and 
prevail when Thou art judged. For behold, I was conceived in iniquities, and in 
sins did my mother bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved truth; the hidden and 
secret things of Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest unto me. Thou shalt 
sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be made clean; Thou shalt wash me, and I 
shall be made whiter than snow. Thou shalt make me to hear joy and gladness; 
the bones that be humbled, they shall rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my sins, 
and blot out all mine iniquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me. Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy 
Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy 
governing Spirit establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the 
ungodly shall turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, 
Thou God of my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice in Thy righteousness. O 
Lord, Thou shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall declare Thy praise. For if 
Thou hadst desired sacrifice, I had given it; with whole-burnt offerings Thou 
shalt not be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit; a heart that is 
broken and humbled God will not despise. Do good, O Lord, in Thy good 
pleasure unto Zion, and let the walls of Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt Thou 
be pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and whole-burnt 
offerings. Then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.  
The Canon, in Tone VI: 
ODE I; in Tone VI: 
Irmos: He Who in ancient times * hid the pursuing tyrant beneath the 
waves of the sea, * hath drawn together and covered the streams of the 
Jordan, * cleansing now my humanity with purity, * for gloriously hath 
He been glorified.  

--- PAGE 2 ---
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O Lord my God, I will sing to Thee a funeral hymn, a song at Thy burial: 
for by Thy burial Thou hast opened for me the gates of life, and by Thy death 
Thou hast slain death and Hades. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
All things above and all beneath the earth quaked with fear at Thy death, as 
they beheld Thee, O my Savior, upon Thy throne on high and in the tomb 
below. For seeing Thee as mortal transcends understanding, O Author of life. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., To fill all things with Thy glory, Thou hast gone 
down into the nethermost parts of the earth: for my nature hidden in Adam is 
not hidden from Thee, but when buried, Thou didst restore it from corruption, 
O Lover of mankind. 
ODE III 
Irmos: When creation beheld Thee, * Who founded the whole earth upon 
the waters, * hanging on Golgotha, * it was seized with awe and cried 
aloud: * None is holy save Thee, O Lord! 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Images of Thy burial hast Thou disclosed in a multitude of visions; and 
now, as the God-Man, Thou hast revealed Thy secrets unto those in Hades, O 
Master, who cry aloud: “None is holy save Thee, O Lord.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou hast stretched out Thine arms and united all that of old was 
separated; clothed in a winding sheet, O Savior, and buried in a tomb, Thou 
hast loosed the captives, who cry aloud: “None is holy save Thee, O Lord.” 
Glory ..., Both now ..., By a tomb and its seals, O Uncontainable One, 
Thou wast willingly contained; but through Thine energies Thou hast showed 
Thy divine power through their action to those who sing: “None is holy save 
Thee, O Lord, Lover of mankind. 
Sessional Hymn, in Tone I: 
The soldiers keeping watch over Thy tomb, O Savior, * became as dead 
men * from the bright effulgence of the appearing of the angel, * who 
proclaimed to the women the Resurrection. * We glorify Thee as the Destroyer 
of corruption; * we fall down before Thee, ** risen from the tomb, our only 
God. 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
ODE IV 
Irmos: Foreseeing Thy divine self-emptying upon the Cross, * 
Habakkuk, in amazement, cried out: * “Thou hast cut asunder the 
strength of the mighty, * O Good One, * and preached to those in Hades, 
* as the Almighty One. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Today Thou hast sanctified the seventh day, which of old Thou didst bless 
by resting from Thy works. Thou bringest all things into being and renewest all 
things, observing the Sabbath, O my Savior, and restoring all. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
By Thy greater power, Thou hast conquered; from the flesh Thy soul was 
parted, yet Thou hast burst asunder both bonds, death and Hades, O Word, by 
Thy might. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Hades was embittered when it met Thee, O Word, 
for it saw a mortal deified, striped with wounds, yet all-powerful; and it shrank 
back in terror at this sight. 
ODE V 
Irmos: Thy Theophany, O Christ, the Unwaning Light, * that mercifully 
came to pass for us, * Isaiah, keeping watch, beheld out of the night, * 
and he cried aloud: * “The dead shall arise, and those in the tombs * 
shall be raised up, * and all that are born of earth shall rejoice.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou dost renew those of earth, O Creator, having been formed from 
dust, and the winding-sheet and tomb reveal, O Word, the mystery that lieth 
within Thee; for the noble counselor typified the counsel of Him that begat 
Thee, Who hath wondrously refashioned me in Thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
By Thy death dost Thou transform mortality and by Thy burial, 
corruption, for Thou hast rendered the nature Thou didst assume incorruptible, 
by Thy divine majesty, making it immortal; for Thy flesh hath not seen 
corruption, O Master, nor was Thy soul left in Hades as a stranger. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Coming forth from an unwedded Mother, and 
wounded in Thy side with a spear, O my Maker, Thou hast brought to pass the 
renewal of Eve. Becoming Adam, Thou hast in ways surpassing nature slept a 
nature-regenerating sleep, raising life from sleep and from corruption, for Thou 
art the Almighty One. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ODE VI 
Irmos: Jonah was caught but not held * in the belly of the whale; * for, 
bearing the image of Thee, * Who hast suffered and wast given to burial, 
* he came forth from the sea-monster as from a bridal chamber, * and he 
called out to the watch: * “O ye who keep guard falsely and in vain, * ye 
have forsaken your own mercy.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Thou wast torn, but not separated, O Word, from the flesh of which Thou 
hadst partaken; for though Thy temple was destroyed at the time of Thy 
Passion, yet the Substance of Thy Godhead and of Thy flesh have been united. 
For in both Thou art the only Son, the Word of God, both God and man. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Fatal to man, but not to God, was the sin of Adam; for though the earthly 
substance of Thy flesh suffered, yet the Godhead remained impassable; that 
which in Thy nature was corruptible hast Thou transformed to incorruption, 
and a fountain of incorruptible life hast Thou revealed by Thy Resurrection. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Hades doth reign over the race of mankind, but not 
forever; for Thou, having been laid in a tomb, O Sovereign Lord, hast burst 
asunder the bars of death with Thy life-giving hand, proclaiming to those who 
slept from ages past, true redemption, O Savior, Who art the Firstborn from the 
dead. 
Kontakion, in Tone VI: 
He Who closed the abyss is beheld as dead, * and as a corpse the Immortal 
One hath been wrapped in linen with sweet spices and laid in a tomb. * The 
women come to anoint Him with myrrh, weeping bitterly and crying: * “This is 
the most blessed Sabbath on which Christ sleepeth, ** but on the third day He 
shall rise again.” 
Ikos: He Who sustaineth all things was lifted up upon the Cross, and all 
creation wept, seeing Him hanging naked on the Tree. The sun hid its rays, and 
the stars cast aside their light; the earth shook in great fear, and the sea fled, the 
rocks were rent asunder, and the graves of many were opened, and the bodies 
of the saints arose. Hades groaned below, and the Jews conspired to spread 
slander against Christ’s Resurrection. But the women cried aloud: “This is the 
most blessed Sabbath on which Christ sleepeth, but on the third day He shall 
rise again.” 

--- PAGE 5 ---
ODE VII 
Irmos: O ineffable wonder! * He Who delivered the holy Children from 
the fiery furnace * is laid a corpse without breath in the tomb, * for the 
salvation of us who sing: * “O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou.” 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
Hades was wounded in its heart when it received Him Who was wounded 
in the side by a spear, and consumed by divine fire it groaned aloud at the 
salvation of us who sing: O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
O wealthy tomb! For it hath received within itself the Creator, as one 
asleep, and was shown to be a divine treasury of life, for the salvation of us who 
sing: O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou. 
Glory ..., In accordance with the law of the dead, the Life of all hath 
submitted to be laid in the tomb, showing it to be a source of awakening, for 
the salvation of us who sing: O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou. 
Both now ..., Whether in Hades or in the tomb or in Eden, the Godhead of 
Christ was indivisibly one with the Father and the Spirit, for the salvation of us 
who sing: O God our Redeemer, blessed art Thou. 
ODE VIII 
Irmos: Be ye astonished and afraid, O heaven, * and let the foundations 
of the earth be shaken; * for lo, He Who dwelleth on high is numbered 
with the dead * and lodgeth as a stranger in a narrow tomb. * Him do ye 
children bless, * ye priests praise, and ye people supremely exalt 
throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The most pure Temple hath been destroyed, but hath raised up the fallen 
tabernacle. For the second Adam, Who dwelleth on high, hath come down to 
the first Adam, even into the chambers of Hades. Him do ye children bless, ye 
priests praise, and ye people supremely exalt throughout all ages. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The disciples’ courage failed, but Joseph of Arimathaea was bolder; for, 
seeing the God of all a corpse and naked, he begged for the body and buried 
Him, crying: Him do ye children bless, ye priests praise, and ye people 
supremely exalt throughout all ages. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Glory ..., Both now ..., O new wonders! O what goodness! O ineffable 
forbearance! For of His own will He Who dwelleth on high hath been sealed 
beneath the earth, and God hath been falsely accused as a deceiver. Him do ye 
children bless, ye priests praise, and ye people supremely exalt throughout all 
ages. 
ODE IX 
Irmos: Weep not for Me, O Mother, * beholding in the tomb the Son 
Whom thou hast conceived * without seed in the womb; * for I shall arise 
and shall be glorified, * and as God I shall exalt with glory unceasing * 
those that with faith and love magnify thee. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
At Thy strange birth, O beginningless Son, I was blessed in ways 
transcending nature, for I was spared the travail of birth. But now, beholding 
Thee, my God, a lifeless corpse, I am pierced with the sword of bitter grief. But 
arise, that I may be magnified. 
Refrain: Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee. 
The earth doth cover Me as I have willed, O Mother, but the gatekeepers 
of Hades tremble upon seeing Me, clothed in the bloodstained garment of 
vengeance; for on the Cross as God have I struck down Mine enemies, and I 
shall rise again and magnify thee. 
Glory ..., Both now ..., Let creation rejoice, let all that are born of earth be 
glad, for the enemy, Hades, hath been despoiled; let the women come with 
myrrh to meet Me, for I have redeemed Adam and Eve with all their offspring, 
and on the third day I shall rise again. 
Trisagion ..., through Our Father ..., Priest: For thine is the Kingdom ...,  
Troparion, in Tone II: 
When Thou didst descend unto death, O Life Immortal, then didst Thou 
slay hades with the lightning of Thy Divinity. And when Thou didst also raise 
the dead out of the nether-most depths, all the hosts of the heavens cried out: 
O Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to Thee. 
Litany: Have mercy on us, O God, (as at the beginning of Matins) 
Priest: Glory to Thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory be to Thee. 
Choir: Glory ..., Both now ..., Amen. 
Lord, have mercy. (Thrice)  
 

--- PAGE 7 ---
THE DISMISSAL 
May Christ our true God, Who rose from the dead, through the 
intercessions of His most pure Mother, of our holy and God-bearing fathers, 
and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and the 
Lover of mankind. 
The Paschal Matins service begins immediately following Small Compline. 
 
