SIXTH HOUR

Come, let us adore...

Psalm 108
O God Whom I praise, do not be silent,* for the mouths of deceit and wickedness are opened against me.
They speak to me with lying tongues;* they beset me with words of hate and attack me without cause.
In return for my love they accuse me while I pray for them.* They repay me evil for good, hatred for love.
For Your name’s sake act in my defense;* in the goodness of Your love be my rescuer.
For I am poor and needy* and my heart is pierced within me.
I fade like an evening shadow;* I am shaken off like a locust.
My knees are weak from fasting;* my body is thin and gaunt.
I have become an object of scorn,* all who see me toss their heads.
Help me, Lord my God,* save me because of Your love.
Let them know that this is Your work,* that this is Your doing, O Lord.
They may curse* but You will bless.
Let my attackers be put to shame,* but let Your servant rejoice.
Let my accusers be clothed with dishonor,* covered with shame as with a cloak.
Loud thanks to the Lord are on my lips.* I will praise Him in the midst of the throng,
For God stands at the side of the poor.* to save them from unjust condemnation.

Psalm 90 (p. 167) and Psalm 51 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 2): You fulfilled our salvation in the middle of the earth, O Christ our God;* You stretched out Your most pure hands on the cross* to gather all the nations who now sing to You:* O Lord, glory to You!

Now and for ever: Since we have no one in whom to confide because of our many sins,* O Virgin Mother of God, intercede for us with the One Who was born of you;* for a mother’s prayer is a powerful means for obtaining the Master’s favor.* You are most worthy of veneration,* so do not turn away from the pleading of us sinners;* for the One Who willed to suffer in the flesh for our sake is full of mercy,* and His power is sufficient to save us.

Then the following stichera are sung:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): O my people, what have I done to you, says the Lord?* How have I grieved you?* I gave sight to those who were blind;* I purified those with leprosy;* I made the paralyzed man rise from his mat.* O My people, what have I done to you?* And what do you give Me in return?* Instead of manna, you give Me gall; and for the water from the rock, you give Me vinegar;* and for my love, you nail Me to the cross.* No longer shall you be my chosen ones;* I shall call the Gentiles to glorify Me, with the Father and the Spirit,* and I shall grant them eternal life.

Verse: For food they gave Me gall; in My thirst they gave Me vinegar to drink.

The choir of the apostles cried out to the doctors of the Law:* O scribes and Pharisees, behold the temple which you have destroyed;* behold the Lamb of God Whom you have crucified.* You placed Him in a tomb, but in His power, He has risen!* It is He Who saved you in the Red Sea;* it is He Who nourished you in the desert;* it is He Who grants life, light and peace to the world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): Come, O Christ-bearing people,* and behold the plot of the traitor Judas* who conspires with the impious priests against Christ our Savior.* Today they brought about the death of the immortal Word* by delivering Him to Pilate to be crucified.* Our Savior suffered on Calvary and said:* Father, forget them this sin,* so that all the nations will come to know My resurrection from the dead.

The rest according to rubrics prescribed in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 8 (Tone 4)
How great is Your name, O Lord our God, through all the earth!
Verse: Your majesty is praised above the heavens.

Lector: A reading from the Book of the prophet Isaiah.

Thus says the Lord: See, my servant shall prosper, he shall be raised high and greatly exalted. Even as many were amazed at him — so marred was his look beyond that of man, and his appearance beyond that of mortals — So shall he startle many nations, because of him kings shall stand speechless; For those who have not been told shall see, those who have not heard shall ponder it. Who would believe what we have heard? To whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed? He grew up like a sapling before him, like a shoot from a parched earth; There was in him no stately bearing to make us look at him, nor appearance that would attract us to him. He was spurned and avoided by men, a man of suffering, accustomed to infirmity, One of those from whom men hide their faces, spurned, and we held him in no esteem. Yet it was our infirmities that he bore, our sufferings that he endured, While we thought of him as stricken, as one smitten by God and afflicted. But he was pierced for our offenses, crushed for our sins, Upon him was the chastisement that makes us whole, by his stripes we were healed. We had all gone astray like sheep, each following his own way; But the LORD laid upon him the guilt of us all. Though he was harshly treated, he submitted and opened not his mouth; Like a lamb led to the slaughter or a sheep before the shearers, he was silent and opened not his mouth. Oppressed and condemned, he was taken away, and who would have thought any more of his destiny? When he was cut off from the land of the living, and smitten for the sin of his people, A grave was assigned him among the wicked and a burial with evildoers, Though he had done no wrong nor spoken any falsehood. [But the LORD was pleased to crush him in infirmity.] If he gives his life as an offering for sin, he shall see his descendants in a long life, and the will of the LORD shall be accomplished through him. Because of his affliction he shall see the light in fullness of days; Through his suffering, my servant shall justify many, and their guilt he shall bear. Therefore I will give him his portion among the great, and he shall divide the spoils with the mighty, Because he surrendered himself to death and was counted among the wicked; And he shall take away the sins of many, and win pardon for their offenses (52:13-15; 53:1-12).

Lector: A reading from the epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews.

Brethren: He who consecrates and those who are being consecrated all have one origin. Therefore, he is not ashamed to call them “brothers,” saying: “I will proclaim your name to my brothers, in the midst of the assembly I will praise you”: and again: “I will put my trust in him”; and again: “Behold, I and the children God has given me.” Now since children share in blood and flesh, he likewise shared in them, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and free those who through fear of death had been subject to slavery all their life. Surely he did not help angels but rather the descendants of Abraham; therefore, he had to become like his brothers in every way, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest before God to expiate the sins of the people. Because he himself was tested through what he suffered, he is able to help those who are being tested (2:11-18).

Gospel: Lk 23: 32-49. The priest himself reads it.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir sings:

Let Your bounties, O Lord, come down upon us in haste,* for our need has become great indeed.* Help us, O God our Savior, for the glory of Your name.* Save us, O Master, and forgive our sins for the sake of Your name.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; kontakion: O come, and let us...; the rest as in the First Hour, except the concluding prayer of the Sixth Hour (p. 170).
