Immediately, the prokimenon is sung according to matinal tone 7.

Arise then, Lord, lift up Your hand! O God, do not forget the poor!
Verse: I will praise You, Lord, with all my heart: I will recount all Your wonders.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the first epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Brethren: your boasting is not appropriate. Do you not know that a little yeast leavens all the dough? Clear out the old yeast, so that you may become a fresh batch of dough, inasmuch as you are unleavened. For our paschal lamb, Christ, has been sacrificed. Therefore, let us celebrate the feast, not with the old yeast, the yeast of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Christ ransomed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written, “Cursed be everyone who hangs on a tree,” that the blessing of Abraham might be extended to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. (1 Cor 5:6-8; Gal 3:13-14).

Alleluia! (Tone 5)
Verse (Ps 67): Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered, and let those who hate Him flee from before His face.
Verse: As smoke vanishes, so let them vanish as wax melts before a fire.
Verse: So let the wicked perish at the presence of God, and let the righteous ones rejoice.

The deacon, having incensed the holy shroud, the priests, and the people, intones:
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to the holy Gospel!
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Deacon: A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew.
Choir: Glory be to Your passion, O Lord!
Gospel: Mt 27:62-66. The priest himself reads the Gospel.
Choir: Glory be to Your long-suffering, O Lord!

Then the litanies Have mercy on us, O God... and Let us complete our morning prayer... (pp. 142-143), and the great dismissal.

After the dismissal, we sing the troparion: The noble Joseph... three times with a prostration each time, (p. 620).

GREAT SATURDAY

Vespers with the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great

At the beginning, everything exactly as prescribed in the note on Great Thursday, (p. 550). The hymn: Blessed is the man... is omitted.

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 1): Accept our evening prayer, O holy Lord,* and grant us forgiveness of sins,* for You alone manifested the resurrection to the world.

O Christ, by Your passion we have been freed from suffering:* and by Your resurrection we have been delivered from corruption.* O Lord, glory to You!

(Tone 8): Today the Abyss sighed and cried out: I should never have received the One Who was born of Mary; for He came against me and destroyed my power and crushed my gates of bronze. Being God, He raised the souls which I once held. Glory to your cross and resurrection, O Lord!

Today the Abyss sighed and cried out:* My power has been destroyed.* For I received a dead Man as one of their dead,* but I could not hold Him.* Then I also lost with Him all those who were under my power.* From the beginning I held the dead,* but now this One raises them.* Glory to Your cross and resurrection, O Lord!

Today the Abyss sighed and cried out:* My power has been swallowed up!* For the Shepherd, crucified, has resurrected Adam,* and those whom I held, I lost.* Those whom I swallowed, I have given up.* For the One they crucified has emptied the graves,* and the power of Death has vanished.* Glory to Your cross and resurrection, O Lord!

(Tone 6): The great Moses foreshadowed this day mystically when he said:* And God blessed the seventh day.* This is the blessed Sabbath.* This is the day of rest* on which the only-begotten Son of God rested from His work,* keeping the Sabbath physically by the providence of death,* in returning through resurrection to what He had been, granting us eternal life;* for He alone is gracious and He loves mankind.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 1 - Dogmaticon): Let us praise the Virgin Mary* who, although born of our humanity, gave birth to the Lord of all;* the angels extol her in song;* for she is the glory of the whole world,* the gateway to heaven, and the adornment of the faithful.* As the Mother of God, she is heaven itself and the very temple of God.* She broke down the wall of enmity between mankind and God,* thereby bringing us peace and opening the gates of the kingdom.* Let us, therefore, cling to her as the anchor of our faith;* and our Lord, Who was born of her, will be our protector.* Take courage then, O people of God,* for the Almighty Himself will defeat your enemies.

The entrance with the Gospel Book; O Joyful Light... and immediately, without the prokimenon, the following readings:
Genesis (1:1-13); Isaiah (60:1-16); Exodus (12:1-11); Jonah (the entire book); Joshua (5:10-15); Exodus (13:20-22;14:1-31;15:1) (shortened – see below).
Before each reading the deacon, standing at the royal doors, turns to the people and exclaims: Wisdom!; and after the lector reads the title of the reading, he says: Let us be attentive!

Lector: A reading from the Book of Exodus.

Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the LORD swept the sea with a strong east wind throughout the night and so turned it into dry land. When the water was thus divided, the Israelites marched into the midst of the sea on dry land, with the water like a wall to their right and to their left. The Egyptians followed in pursuit; all Pharaoh’s horses and chariots and charioteers went after them right into the midst of the sea. In the night watch just before dawn the LORD cast through the column of the fiery cloud upon the Egyptian force a glance that threw it into a panic; and he clogged their chariot wheels that they could hardly drive. With that the Egyptians sounded the retreat before Israel, because the LORD was fighting for them against the Egyptians. Then the LORD told Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, that the water may flow back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots and their charioteers.” So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and at dawn the sea flowed back to its normal depth. The Egyptians were fleeing head on toward the sea, when the LORD hurled them into its midst. As the water flowed back, it covered the chariots and the charioteers of Pharaoh’s whole army which had followed the Israelites into the sea. Not a single one of them escaped. But the Israelites had marched on dry land through the midst of the sea, with the water like a wall to their right and to their left. Thus the LORD saved Israel on that day from the power of the Egyptians. When Israel saw the Egyptians lying dead on the seashore and beheld the great power that the LORD had shown against the Egyptians, they feared the LORD, and believed in him and in his servant Moses. Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song: (14:21-15:1)

Then the following verses are read, which are a continuation of the previous reading; before each verse the choir sings the refrain in the melody of the matinal prokimenon tone 5.

Refrain: Let us sing to the Lord,* for He has been mightily glorified.
Verse: Horse and rider He cast into the sea.
Verse: Help and protector was He for my salvation.
Verse: He is my God, and I shall glorify Him; the God of my father, and I shall exalt Him.
Verse: The Lord crushes enemies; Lord is His name. Pharaoh’s chariots and might He cast into the sea.
Verse: Who among the gods is like You, Lord? Who like You is glorified in holiness, wondrous in glory and performing marvels?
Verse: The Lord rules forever and ever.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Let us sing to the Lord, for He has been mightily glorified.

The second series of readings: Zephaniah (3:8-15); I Kings (17:8-24); Isaiah (61:10-11; 62:1-5); Genesis (22:1-18); Isaiah (61:1-9); II Kings (4:8-37); Isaiah (63:11-19; 64:1-5); Jeremiah (31:31-34); Daniel (3:1-32) (see below).

Lector: A reading from the Book of Daniel.

King Nebuchadnezzar had a golden statue made, sixty cubits high and six cubits wide, which he set up in the plain of Dura in the province of Babylon. He then ordered the satraps, prefects, and governors, the counselors, treasurers, judges, magistrates and all the officials of the provinces to be summoned to the dedication of the statue which he had set up. ... All these ... stood before the statue which Nebuchadrezzar set up. ... At that point some of the Chaldeans came and accused the Jews to King Nebuchadrezzar: “... O king, you issued a decree that everyone who heard the sound of the trumpet, flute, lyre, harp, psaltery, bagpipe, and all other musical instruments should fall down and worship the golden statue; whoever did not was to be cast into a white-hot furnace. There are certain Jews whom you have made administrators of the province of Babylon: Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego; these men, O king, have paid no attention to you; they will not serve your god or worship the golden statue which you set up.” ... Nebudchadnezzar’s face became livid with utter rage against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He ordered the furnace to be heated seven times more than usual and had some of the strongest men in his army bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego and cast them into the white-hot furnace. They were bound and cast into the white-hot furnace with their coats, hats, shoes and other garments, for the king’s order was urgent. So huge a fire was kindled in the furnace that the flames devoured the men who threw Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego into it. But these three fell, bound, into the midst of the white-hot furnace. They walked about in the flames, singing to God and blessing the Lord. ... Now the king’s men who had thrown them in continued to stoke the furnace with brimstone, pitch, tow, and faggots. The flames rose forty-nine cubits above the furnace, and spread out, burning the Chaldeans nearby. But the angel of the Lord went down into the furnace with Azariah and his companions, drove the fiery flames out of the furnace, and made the inside of the furnace as though a dew-laden breeze were blowing through it. The fire in no way touched them or cause them pain or harm. Then these three in the furnace with one voice sang, glorifying and blessing God: “Blessed are you, O Lord, God of our fathers, praiseworthy and exalted above all forever.”

Then the following verses are taken, which are a continuation of the previous reading; before each verse the choir sings the following refrain in the melody of the matinal prokimenon tone 5.

Refrain: Sing praise to the Lord and exalt Him above all forever.

Verse: Bless the Lord, all you works of the Lord.
Verse: Angels of the Lord, and you heavens, bless the Lord
Verse: Sun and moon, stars of the heaven, bless the Lord.
Verse: Mountains and hills, and everything growing from the earth, bless the Lord. You springs, and seas and rivers, bless the Lord. You whales and all water creatures, bless the Lord.
Verse: All you birds of the air, and beasts wild and tame, bless the Lord.
Verse: Let us bless the Lord, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, always, now and ever, and forever.
Verse: Let us praise, bless, and bow down before the Lord — giving Him glorious praise forever.

Then the deacon intones the small litany:

Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life, to Christ our God.
Priest: For You are holy, our God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, always, now and for ever:
Deacon: And ever.
Choir: Amen. – Instead of “Holy God:” All you who have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia. (3x); the rest is the Liturgy of St. Basil.

Prokimenon: Ps 65 (Tone 5)
Let all the earth worship and sing praise to You, sing praise to Your name, O Most High.
Verse: Shout joyfully to the Lord, all the earth sing praise to His name; give to Him glorious praise.

Epistle: A reading from the epistle of St. Paul to the Romans.

Brethren: Are you unaware that we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were indeed buried with him through baptism into death, so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father we too might live in newness of life. For if we have grown into union with him through a death like his, we shall also be united with him in the resurrection. We know that our old self was crucified with him, so that our sinful body might be done away with, that we might no longer be in slavery to sin. For a dead person has been absolved from sin. If, then, we have died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him. We know that Christ, raised from the dead, dies not more; death no longer has power over him. As to his death, he died to sin once and for all; as to his life, he lives for God. Consequently, you too must think of yourselves as being dead to sin and living for God in Christ Jesus. (6:3-11).

After the reading of the epistle, the priest and deacon put on bright vestments, while the lector intones the verses taken from Psalm 81; after each verse the choir sings the following refrain in the melody of the prokimenon of Tone 7.

Refrain: Arise, O God, and judge the earth, for all nations belong to You.

Verse: God stands in the divine assembly. In the midst of the gods He gives judgment.
Verse: How long will You judge unjustly, and favor the cause of the wicked?
Verse: Do justice for the weak and the orphan; defend the afflicted and the needy.
Verse: Save the poor and the destitute, and liberate them from the hands of sinners.
Verse: Unperceiving, they grope in the darkness; and the order of the world is shaken.
Verse: I have said: You call yourselves gods, and all of you, children of the Most High. And yet, you shall die like mortals, you shall fall like any earthly ruler.

Before and after the Gospel the choir sings: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You!

Gospel: Mt 28:1-20. The deacon reads it. Instead of the Cherubic Hymn, the following hymn is sung:

(Tone 8): Let all mortal flesh be silent, and let it stand with fear and awe, having no earthly thought. The King of kings and the Lord of lords comes to be sacrificed and to be given as food to the faithful. Before Him go the choirs of angelic hosts, Powers and Principalities, the many-eyed Cherubim and the six-winged Seraphim. They cover their faces while they chant: Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!

Instead of It is truly right..., – take the hirmos: Weep not for me, O My Mother... (p. 616).

Communion Verse: The Lord arose as out of a sleep, and having resurrected, He saves us. Alleluia! (3x).

When the priest reads the prayer at the ambo before the holy shroud, the sacristan brings out the litijnyk with the breads, wine, and oil. After the prayer at the ambo, the choir does not sing: Blessed be the name of the Lord..., but immediately the deacon intones: Let us pray to the Lord; Choir: Lord, have mercy. The priest reads the prayer for the blessing of the breads, (p. 34).
Choir: Amen. Blessed be the name of the Lord. The rest is the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great.

Service at the Grave

The priest, vested in Lenten vestments, stands before the holy shroud and intones; Blessed is our God... Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God... and the usual beginning, (p. 10); Psalm 50, (p. 128); canon – Ode 9, “Do no weep for me, O Mother ...” (p. 616); Holy God...; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the troparion: Although You descended into the grave..., (p. 1231), without the Glory be: Now and for ever: the litany Have mercy on us, O God... from Small Compline, (p. 59); the dismissal of Great Saturday Matins, (p 1254); then: The noble Joseph..., (p. 620), three times, with a prostration each time; finally, the holy shroud is placed on the altar, according to custom.
