GREAT THURSDAY

Vespers with the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great

Note:
The priest, vested in Lenten vestments, having performed the rite of proskomedia, stands before the altar and intones: Blessed be the kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You! Heavenly King...; the rest is in ordinary Vespers. The holy doors are closed until the hymn: O Joyful Light.

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 2): The Jewish council gathers to deliver to Pilate* the Author and Creator of all.* O what iniquity and infidelity!* They prepare for judgment* the One Who comes to judge the living and the dead;* they prepare to make suffer the One Who heals all suffering;* therefore, O long-suffering Lord, great is Your mercy.* Glory be to You.

O Lord, the law-transgressing Judas,* who, at supper, dipped his hand in the plate with You,* extends his sinful hand to take silver;* and he who placed value on the spice* did not shrink from selling You, O priceless Lord.* He put forth his feet, O Master, for You to wash;* then kissed You in deceit as a sign to the lawbreakers.* Thus he ceased to be an apostle;* and having cast away the thirty silver pieces,* never saw Your resurrection on the third day.* Have mercy on us through that same resurrection.

Judas the traitor, being deceitful,* with a kiss of deceit betrayed the Savior,* Lord and Master of all;* and sold Him as a slave to the Jews.* Like a sheep being led to slaughter,* so went the Lamb of God, the Father’s Son,* and the only All-merciful One.

Judas showed himself by his deeds* to be a servant yet a deceiver, a disciple yet a betrayer,* and a friend yet a devil.* For as he followed the Master he concealed the betrayal, saying to himself:* I will betray this One and gain much wealth.* He sought to sell the ointment that he might trap the Lord.* He gave a kiss and betrayed Christ,* Who like a lamb was led to the slaughter* and Who alone has compassion and love for mankind.

Glory be: (Tone 2): The Lamb, foretold by Isaiah,* willingly comes to be slaughtered,* offering His back to scourges and His cheeks to be slapped.* Even His face He did not turn from the shame of spit,* as He was condemned to a shameful death.* The sinless Lord endures all this with willingness,* so that He might grant resurrection from the dead to all.

Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Truly, Judas is the son of those ungrateful* who ate the manna in the wilderness,* and murmured against the Nourisher;* for while food was still in their mouths,* those ingrates murmured against God.* Likewise this wicked one,* while the morsel was still in his mouth,* conspired to betray the Savior.* O what greedy purpose!* What bold inhumanity!* For he betrayed the Nourisher* and delivered to death, the Master Who loved him.* In truth, this lawbreaker is a son of unbelievers,* and inherited destruction with them.* Save our souls, O Lord, from such unkindness;* for You alone can endure such long-suffering.

The entrance with the Gospel Book and O Joyful Light.

Prokimenon: Ps 139 (Tone 1)
Rescue me, Lord, from the wicked; from the violent keep me safe.
Verse: From those who plan evil in their hearts and stir up strife every day.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of Exodus.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Lector: The LORD said to Moses: “Go to the people and have them sanctify themselves today and tomorrow. Make them wash their garments and be ready for the third day; for on the third day the LORD will come down on Mount Sinai before the eyes of all the people. Set limits for the people all around the mountain and tell them: Take care not to go up the mountain, or even to touch its base. If anyone touches the mountain, he must be put to death. No hand shall touch him; he must be stoned to death or killed with arrows. Such a one, man or beast, must not be allowed to live. Only when the ram’s horns resound, may they go up to the mountain.” Then Moses came down from the mountain to the people and had them sanctify themselves and wash their garments. He warned them: “Be ready for the third day. Have no intercourse with any woman.” On the morning of the third day there were peals of thunder and lightning, and a heavy cloud over the mountain, and a very loud trumpet blast, so that all the people in the camp trembled. But Moses led the people out of the camp to meet God, and they stationed themselves at the foot of the mountain. Mount Sinai was all wrapped in smoke, for the LORD came down upon it in fire. The smoke rose from it as though from a furnace, and the whole mountain trembled violently. The trumpet blast grew louder and louder, while Moses was speaking and God answering him with thunder (19: 10-19).

Immediately after the reading, the choir sings the second prokimenon:

Prokimenon: Ps 58 (Tone 7)
Rescue me, God, from my foes; protect me from those who attack me.
Verse: O rescue me from those who do evil.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of Job.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Lector: The LORD addressed Job out of the storm and said: Who is this that obscured divine plans with words of ignorance? Gird up your loins now, like a man; I will question you, and you tell me the answers! Where were you when I founded the earth? Tell me, if you have understanding. Who determined its size, do you know? Who stretched out the measuring line for it? Into what were its pedestals sunk, and who laid the cornerstone, While the morning stars sang in chorus and all the sons of God shouted for joy? And who shut within the doors of the sea, when it burst forth from the womb; When I made the clouds its garment and thick darkness its swaddling bands? When I set limits for it and fastened the bar of its door, And said: Thus far shall you come but no farther, and here shall your proud waves be stilled! Have you ever in your lifetime commanded the morning and shown the dawn its place For taking hold of the ends of the earth, till the wicked are shaken from its surface? Have you entered into the sources of the sea, or walked about in the depths of the abyss? Have the gates of death been shown to you, or have you seen the gates of darkness? Then Job answered the LORD and said: I know that you can do all things, and that no purpose of yours can be hindered. I have dealt with great things that I do not understand; things too wonderful for me, which I cannot know. I had heard of you by word of mouth, but now my eye has seen you (38:1-13, 16-17; 42:1-5).

Another reading: Is 50:4-11 (p. 583).

After the reading the deacon intones the small litany.

Priest: For You are holy, our God, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever:
Deacon: And ever.
Choir: Amen. Holy God, Holy Mighty One, Holy Immortal One, have mercy on us. – The rest is the Liturgy of St. Basil.

Prokimenon: Ps 2 (Tone 7)
The princes of the people have gathered together against the Lord and against his Anointed One.
Verse: Why do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing?

Lector: A reading from the first epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.
I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you; that the Lord Jesus, on the night he was handed over, took bread, and, after he had given thanks, broke it and said, “This is my body that is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.” For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the death of the Lord until he comes. Therefore, whoever eats this bread or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will have to answer for the body and blood of the Lord. A person should examine himself, and so eat the bread and drink the cup. For anyone who eats and drinks without discerning the body, eats and drinks judgment on himself (1 Cor, 11: 23-29).

Alleluia: Ps 40 (Tone 6)
Happy are those who consider the poor and the weak; when misfortune strikes, the Lord delivers them.
Verse: My foes are speaking evil against me. They want me to die and my name to perish.
Verse: The one who ate my bread, has turned against me.

Before the Gospel, the choir sings: Glory be to Your passion, O Lord.
After the Gospel the choir sings: Glory be to Your long-suffering, O Lord.

Instead of the Cherubic Hymn and That we may receive..., the following hymn is sung:

(Tone 6): Let me this day, O Son of God,* be a partaker of Your mystical supper;* for I will not reveal Your Mysteries to Your enemies,* nor will I betray You with a kiss as did Judas,* but like the repentant thief* I openly profess You:* Remember me, O Lord,* in Your kingdom.

Instead of It is truly right...: we sing In you, O Woman Full of Grace... or the following hirmos:

(Tone 6): Come, all you faithful, let us with minds uplifted* enjoy the hospitality and the immortal banquet of the Lord,* in the upper chamber, in that we have learned the Word from the Word* Who had gone up on high, Whom we magnify.

Instead of the communion verse and May our mouths be filled..., we sing: Let me this day.... (see above).
