THIRD HOUR

Come, let us adore...

Psalm 68
Save me, O God,* for the waters have risen to my neck.
I have sunk into the mud of the deep* and there is no foothold.
I have entered the waters of the deep* and the waves overwhelm me.
I am wearied with all my crying,* my throat is parched.
My eyes are wasted away* from looking for my God.
More numerous than the hairs on my head* are those who hate me without cause.
Those who attack me with lies* are too much for my strength.
How can I restore* what I have never stolen?
O God, You know my sinful folly;* my sins You can see.
Let not those who hope in You* be put to shame through me. Lord of hosts;
Let not those who seek You* be dismayed through me, God of Israel.
It is for You that I suffer taunts,* that shame covers my face,
That I have become a stranger to my family,* an alien to my brothers and sisters.
I burn with zeal for Your house* and taunts against You fall on me.
When I afflict my soul with fasting* they make it a taunt against me.
When I put on sackcloth in mourning* then they make me a byword,
The gossip of folk at the gates,* the subject of drunkards’ songs.
This is my prayer to You,* my prayer for Your favor.
In Your great love, answer me, O God,* with Your help that never fails;
Rescue me from sinking in the mud,* save me from my foes.
Save me from the waters of the deep* lest the waves overwhelm me.
Do not let the deep engulf me* nor death close its mouth on me.
Lord, answer, for Your love is kind;* in Your compassion, turn towards me.
Do not hide Your face from Your servant,* answer quickly for I am in distress.
Come close to my soul and redeem me;* ransom me pressed by my foes.
You know how they taunt and deride me;* my oppressors are all before You.
Taunts have broken my heart;* I have reached the end of my strength.
I looked in vain for compassion for consolers;* not one could I find.
For food they gave me poison;* in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Let their table be a snare to them* and their festive banquets a trap.
Let their eyes grow dim and blind;* let their limbs tremble and shake.
Pour out Your anger upon them,* let the heat of Your fury overtake them.
Let their camp be left desolate,* let no one dwell in their tents:
For they persecute one whom You struck,* they increase the pain of one You wounded,
Charge them with guilt upon guilt;* let them never be found just in Your sight.
Blot them out from the book of the living;* do not enroll them among the just.
As for me in my poverty and pain,* let Your help, O God, lift me up.
I will praise God’s name with a song;* I will glorify Him with thanksgiving.
A gift pleasing God more than oxen,* more than beasts prepared for sacrifice.
The poor when they see it will be glad* and God-seeking hearts will revive;
For the Lord listens to the needy* and does not spurn His servants in their chains.
Let the heavens and the earth give Him praise,* the sea and all its living creatures.
For God will bring help to Zion and rebuild the cities of Judah* and people shall dwell there in possession.
The children of His servants shall inherit it;* those who love His name shall dwell there.

Psalm 50 (p. 161) and Psalm 40 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 6): O Lord, the children of Israel have condemned You to death;* You the Life of the world.* Those who crossed the Red Sea because of the staff of Moses,* have nailed You to the wood of the cross;* those who tasted the honey from the rock,* have given You gall as food.* Yet You suffered willingly to deliver us from slavery to the enemy.* O Christ our God, glory to You!

Now and for ever: O Mother of God, you are the true vine laden with the Fruit of life;* wherefore, we implore You, O Lady,* to intercede together with the apostles and all the saints* that we may obtain mercy for our souls.

Then we sing the following stichera:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): Through fear of the Jews,* Peter, Your companion and friend denied You, O Lord;* then, in his tears, he cried out:* Let not the fountain of my tears dry up;* for I had promised fidelity,* but I did not keep my promise.* Grant us this same repentance, O Lord, and have mercy on us.

Verse: For food they gave Me gall; in My thirst they gave Me vinegar.

The soldiers mocked You, O Lord, before Your precious cross;* the heavenly armies were struck with amazement.* For You were crowned with scorn,* You, the One Who crowns the earth with flowers;* You were clothed in the purple of derision;* You, the One Who clothes the firmament with clouds.* You reveal Your mercy in Your work of salvation.* O Lord, glory to You!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): When You were placed on the cross, O Lord,* You cried out to the people:* For which of my works do you wish to crucify Me?* Is it because I made Your paralyzed ones walk,* or because I have raised the dead from their sleep?* Is it because I healed the woman with a flow of blood,* or took pity on the Canaanite woman?* For which work do you wish to kill Me?* Behold the One Whom you shall pierce!

The rest according to the rubrics prescribed in the First Hour.

Prokimenon: Ps 37 (Tone 4)
For I am on the point of falling and my pain is always before me.
Verse: O Lord, do not rebuke me in Your anger; do not punish me, Lord, in Your rage.

Lector: A reading from the Book of Isaiah.

The Lord GOD has given me a well-trained tongue, That I might know how to speak to the weary a word that will rouse them. Morning after morning he opens my ear that I may hear; And I have not rebelled, I have not turned back. I gave my back to those who beat me, my cheeks to those who plucked my beard; My face I did not shield from buffets and spitting. The Lord GOD is my help, therefore, I am not disgraced; I have set my face like flint, knowing that I shall not be put to shame. He is near who upholds my right; if anyone wishes to oppose me, let us appear together. Who disputes my right? Let him confront me. See, the Lord GOD is my help; who will prove me wrong? Lo, they will all wear out like cloth; the moth will eat them up. Who among you fears the LORD, heeds his servant’s voice, And walks in darkness without any light, Trusting in the name of the LORD and relying on his God? All of you kindle flames and carry about you fiery darts; Walk by the light of your own fire and by the flares you have burnt! This is your fate from my hand; you shall lie down in a place of pain (50:4-11).

Lector: A reading from the epistle of St. Paul to the Romans.

Brethren: For Christ, while we were still helpless, yet died at the appointed time for the ungodly. Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person, though perhaps for a good person one might even find courage to die. But God proves his love for us in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us. How much more then, since we are now justified by his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath. Indeed, if, while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more, once reconciled, will we be saved by his life (5:6-10).

Gospel: Mk 15:16-41. The priest alone reads it.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir sings:

Blessed is the Lord God! Blessed is the Lord day by day! May the God of our salvation smooth our path. Our God is the God of salvation.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; kontakion: O come, and let us...; the rest as in the First Hour, except the concluding prayer:

Prayer of the Third Hour

O God our Master, almighty Father; only-begotten Son, Lord Jesus Christ; and You, O Holy Spirit, one God and one Might, have mercy on me a sinner, and save me, Your unworthy servant, according to the ways of Your wisdom. For You are blessed forever and ever. Amen.
