GREAT SATURDAY
JERUSALEM MATINS

(on Friday evening)

A table is placed before the holy shroud, and on it is placed the Gospel Book between two candles. Before this table, the priest celebrates Matins along with the concelebrants. For text of the Stations, see pp. 1338-1340. Having incensed the shroud and the people, he begins: Glory be to the holy consubstantial...; Psalm 142; the litany; God the Lord..., and the following troparia:

(Tone 2): The noble Joseph* took down from the cross Your most pure body.* Anointing it with spices,* he wrapped it in pure linen* and placed it in a new tomb.

Glory be: When You descended to Death, O immortal Life,* You destroyed the Abyss by the radiance of Your divinity.* And when You raised the dead from the depths of the earth,* all the heavenly powers cried out:* O Giver of life, Christ our God, glory to You.

Now and for ever: The angel standing by the grave* exclaimed to the myrrh-bearing women:* Spices are meant for the dead,* but Christ reveals Himself as not subject to decay.

First Station

We extol You, O Christ, Giver of life, Who yesterday were crucified for us and placed in a tomb, granting life to those in the grave.

Melody for the Verses:
They are happy whose life is blameless, who follow God's law.

The tomb became Your dwelling place; how can our life descend to death? Yet You destroyed the kingdom of death and saved the dead by raising them from Hades.

Verse: They never do anything evil, but walk in His ways.

We venerate Your burial and the passion You endured to save us, and the death which delivers us from corruption; and we praise and extol Your kingdom.

Verse: You have laid down Your precepts to be obeyed with care.

You created the earth, establishing its size and breadth. Today, O King of all, You dwell in the confines of the tomb, but You raise the dead from their tombs with You.

Verse: I will thank You with an upright heart as I learn Your decrees.

O Savior of all, Christ Jesus, the King of the universe, what did you seek when You descended into Hades? It is our human race that You wished to save.

Verse: I rejoiced to do Your will as though all riches were mine.

Today You were placed in a tomb, O Christ our life; by death You have conquered the kingdom of death and You open the fountains of life for the world.

Verse: Your will is my delight; Your statutes are my counselors.

You descended to the grave without leaving the Fatherly bosom; who can grasp this dazzling mystery which surpasses our understanding?

Verse: I will run the way of Your commands; You give freedom to my heart.

You were placed in a new tomb, O Christ my Savior; thus You renewed the whole human race by raising them from the dead in Your divine power.

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:

We praise You, O Word, the only Lord and God of the universe and with You we praise the Father and the Holy Spirit; at Your tomb, we sing of Your glory.

Now and for ever and ever. Amen.

Blessed are you and we extol you, O most pure Virgin Mother, as we adore your Son and our God in faith; for us He spent three days in the tomb.

The deacon incenses the shroud and the people, and then intones the small litany:

Deacon: Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Help us, save us, have mercy and protect us, O God, by Your grace.
Deacon: Remembering our most holy and immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary together with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole life, to Christ our God.
Priest: For blessed is Your name and glorified is Your kingdom Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Second Station

It is proper and just to extol You and praise Your glory, O Giver of life; for You stretched out Your hands on the cross and broke the power of our enemy.

Verse: It was Your hands that made me and shaped me; help me to learn Your commands.

It is proper and just to extol You and praise Your glory, O Word and Creator, for You deliver us from corruption and by Your suffering you quell our passions.

Verse: Your faithful will see me and rejoice, for I trust in Your word.

The earth trembled with fear and the sun was darkened, when it saw You, O Christ, the unsetting Light, bodily buried in the earth.

Verse: Your truth lasts from age to age, like the earth You created.

When he placed You in the new tomb, O my Savior, Joseph piously sang the dirges that flowed from His grief and the hymns that praised Your divinity.

Verse: I turn my feet from evil paths, to obey Your word.

You've gone down beneath the earth, O God and Creator and the radiant star sets with You; every creature is seized with fear upon seeing the Creator of Light grow dim.

Verse: I have sworn and have made up my mind to obey Your decrees.

Unsetting Star and Light that knows no evening, You now set bodily in the earth; unable to bear the eclipse of its God, the sun is wrapped in darkness at the height of day.

Verse: Though the wicked try to ensnare me, I do not stray from Your precepts.

In the short time You were asleep, You gave life to the dead; and in Your resurrection You raise those who had been asleep from all times.

Verse: I open my mouth and I sigh, as I yearn for Your commands.

With our hymns, we praise, O Christ, the divine brightness of Your precious cross and Your life-giving burial; for You redeem us from the snare of the enemy.

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:

O Trinity Who reigns forever, God the Father in union with the Word and the Spirit, grant Your divine support to Your faithful and strengthen our hearts in the face of the enemy.

Now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O holy Virgin, all-pure and immaculate, you gave birth to the Giver of Life; save our Church from adversity, and in your goodness grant that we may live in peace.

The deacon incenses the shroud and the people, and then intones the small litany.

Priest: For You are holy, O our God, and You sit upon the throne of the cherubim; and we render glory to You, together with Your eternal Father and Your all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Third Station

All peoples and nations praise Your burial, O Christ, and offer You their hymns and praise.

Verse: Turn and show me Your mercy; show justice to Your friends.

When he took You down from the cross and wrapped You in pure linen, Joseph placed You in his own tomb.

Verse: Let my steps be guided by Your promise; let no evil rule me.

The Myrrh-bearers took spices to anoint Your divine body and hastened to offer them to You, O Christ.

Verse: Tears stream from my eyes, because You law is disobeyed.

O thrice-blessed Joseph, you offer your respects to the most pure body of Christ the Lord and Master of life.

Verse: The justice of Your will is eternal; if You teach me I shall live.

To bury their Creator, Joseph and Nicodemus have brought a jar of myrrh and aloes.

Verse: Numberless, Lord, are your mercies; with Your decrees give me life.

Son of God and King of all, Lord my God and Creator, how do You deign to suffer so?

Verse: Lord, let my cry come before You: teach me by Your word.

In heaven the angels of the Lord tremble with fear seeing Christ lying in the shadow of death.

Verse: Let my pleading come before You; save me by Your promise.

We praise You with our love; by Your passion grant to us sinners Your grace and forgiveness.

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit:

O Trinity, O divine majesty, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, have mercy on Your world.

Now and for ever and ever. Amen.

O Virgin Mother of God, grant that Your servants may behold the resurrection of your Son.

Immediately after the stations: Hosts of angels..., (p. 125). The deacon takes the small litany, without incensing.

Priest: For You are the King of peace, O Christ our God, and we give glory to You, together with Your eternal Father and Your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and forever. Amen.

Sessional Hymn (Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): Joseph went to Pilate and begged for Your body;* he wrapped it in a pure linen cloth,* anointed it with precious spices* and placed it in a new tomb.* Early in the morning, the holy myrrh-bearers cried out:* O Christ, as You foretold, show us Your resurrection.

Psalm 50 (p. 128).

Canon – Ode 9

The deacon or the priest incenses and then intones: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos and the Mother of Light in hymns! Omit the Magnificat; the choir immediately sings the hirmos:

Hirmos (Tone 6): Do not weep for me, O Mother, even though you have seen me, lying in the tomb the Son to whom you gave birth in a wondrous manner; for I shall arise and be glorified; and in my divine glory, I shall forever exalt the faithful who love you and sing the praises of your glory.

Verse: Glory be to Your holy burial, O Lord!
I conceived You in a wondrous way, O my eternal Son,* and I was happier than all women,* for I did not suffer any pain.* But today I see You lifeless, O my God,* and a sword of sadness pierces me in a most cruel manner;* but arise, O Lord, that I may extol You.

Verse: Glory be to Your holy burial, O Lord!
O Mother, the earth covers Me by my own will;* but the guardians of Hades shudder to see Me* wearing the bloody garment of punishment;* for, on the cross, I have struck down My enemies;* I shall arise as God, and you shall be exalted.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Let creation rejoice and let all mortals exult with joy!* I have despoiled the enemy Hades;* let the myrrh-bearing women come to anoint Me.* I redeem Adam and Eve and all the human race;* and on the third day, I shall arise.

Katabasia: Do not weep for me, O Mother,* even though you have seen lying in the tomb* the Son to Whom you gave birth in a wondrous manner;* for I shall arise and be glorified;* and in My divine glory, I shall forever exalt the faithful who love you* and sing the praises of your glory.

Holy is the Lord our God (Tone 2) (3x).
Exapostilarion is omitted.

Psalm 148
Let everything that lives and breathes give praise to the Lord. Praise the Lord from the heavens, praise Him in the heights. To You is due a hymn, O God!
Praise Him, all His angels, praise Him, all His hosts. To You is due a hymn, O God! (See p. 148).

Verse: Praise Him for His powerful deeds, praise His surpassing greatness.

(Tone 2): Today the One Who holds all creation in His hand* is Himself held in the tomb;* a rock covers the One Who covered the heavens with beauty;* Life has fallen asleep.* Hades is seized with fear,* and Adam is freed from His bonds.* Glory to Your work of salvation;* through it You accomplished the eternal Sabbath rest,* and You grant us the gift of Your holy resurrection.

Verse: Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet, praise Him with lute and harp.
What is this sight that we behold!* God rests today;* by His passion, the King of the ages completed His work of salvation,* and He renews the Sabbath in His tomb.* We praise the infinite mercy of God;* arise, O Lord, and judge the earth,* for You reign forever.

Verse: Praise Him with timbrel and dance, praise Him with strings and pipes.
Come, let us contemplate our Life placed in the tomb,* that those who lie in the tombs may live.* Come, let us contemplate today the Lion of Judah;* with the prophet, let us cry out to Him:* You rest and sleep, and who can awaken You, O our King?* Arise, in Your power, O Lord,* Who willingly gave Yourself for us, glory to you.

Verse: Praise Him with resounding cymbals, praise Him with clashing of cymbals. Let everything that lives and that breathes give praise to the Lord.

(Tone 6): Joseph asked for Your most pure body,* and he placed it in His new tomb.* For it is fitting that You come forth from the tomb as from a bridal chamber.* You have broken the kingdom of death, O Christ,* and opened the gates of paradise to mortals;* O Lord, glory to You.

Glory be: (Tone 6): Today the mystical word of the prophet Moses is fulfilled:* And God blessed the seventh day.* For behold, this is the blessed day of the Sabbath,* behold, this is the day of rest,* on which the only Son of God rested from all His work.* In His bodily death which He endured for our salvation,* He returns to the glory from which He came;* and by His resurrection, He grants eternal life* in His goodness and love for mankind.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): You are truly most blessed..., (p. 140).

Great Doxology

Priest: Glory to You, Who have shown us the light.
Choir: Glory to God in the highest..., (p. 140).

During the great doxology, the deacon takes the Gospel Book, which rests on the table before the holy shroud, and all make a procession around the altar and again return before the holy shroud.

After the great doxology and Holy God..., the choir sings:

(Tone 5): Come and let us bless the memory of Joseph of Arimathea,* who went to Pilate by night to beg for the One Who is our Life:* Give me the body of this pilgrim Who has no place to lay His head:* give me the body of my Lord and Master,* Who was led to death by a wicked disciple;* give me the body of the only Son,* Whose Mother saw Him hanging on the cross,* weeping and sighing as she cried out in a motherly lament:* Alas, O my beloved Son!* Alas, O Light of my eyes,* O Treasure of my heart and soul;* today the prophecy of Simeon in the Temple is fulfilled:* for a sword has pierced my heart;* but You shall change my grief into the joy of Your resurrection.* We bow before Your passion, O Christ:* we bow before Your passion, O Christ;* we bow before Your passion, O Christ;* and we adore Your holy resurrection.

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

The choir sings the following troparia:

(Tone 2): The noble Joseph* took down your most pure body from the cross.* He wrapped it in a clean shroud,* and with fragrant spices laid it in burial in a new tomb.* But You arose in three days, O Lord,* bestowing great mercy upon the world.

And immediately, without the Glory be: Now and for ever:

(Tone 2): O Christ, Who holds fast the ends of the earth,* You have accepted to be held fast within the tomb,* You have conferred upon us immortality and life.

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

Prokimenon: Ps 43 (Tone 4)
Stand up and come to our help! Redeem us because of Your love.
Verse: We heard with our own ears, O God, our forebears have told us the story.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of the prophet Ezekiel.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: The hand of the LORD came upon me, and he led me out in the spirit of the LORD and set me in the center of the plain, which was now filled with bones. He made me walk among them in every direction so that I saw how many they were on the surface of the plain. How dry they were! He asked me: Son of man, can these bones come to life? “Lord GOD,” I answered, “you alone know that.” Then he said to me: Prophesy over these bones, and say to them: Dry bones, hear the word of the LORD! Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones: See! I will bring spirit into you, that you may come to life. I will put sinews upon you, make flesh grow over you, cover you with skin; and put spirit in you so that you may come to life and know that I am the LORD. I prophesied as I had been told, and even as I was prophesying I heard a noise; it was a rattling as the bones came together, bone joining bone. I saw the sinews and the flesh come upon them, and the skin cover them, but there was no spirit in them. Then he said to me, Prophesy to the spirit, son of man, and say to the spirit: Thus says the Lord GOD: From the four winds come, O spirit, and breathe into these slain that they may come to life. I prophesied as he told me, and the spirit came into them; they came alive and stood upright, a vast army. Then he said to me: son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. They have been saying, “Our bones are dried up, our hope is lost, and we are cut off.” Therefore, prophesy and say to them: Thus says the Lord GOD: O my people, I will open your graves and have you rise from them, and bring you back to the land of Israel. Then you shall know that I am the LORD, when I open your graves and have you rise from them, O my people! I will put my spirit in you that you may live, and I will settle you upon your land; thus you shall know that I am the LORD. I have promised, and I will do it, says the LORD. (37: 1-14).
