THURSDAY MATINS

After God the Lord..., the troparion: You ascended in glory....

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Zheny ko hrobu): You ascended in glory, and the angels were astonished at this wonder;* the disciples were amazed at Your marvelous ascension;* and the gates opened before You, O Lord.* The powers of heaven were also overjoyed, and they cried out;* Glory to Your condescension!* Glory to Your kingdom!* Glory to Your ascension, O only Lover of mankind!
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): The God Who exists before all eternity* and Who has mystically divinized the human nature which He assumed,* today goes up to heaven.* The angels precede Him and show to the disciples* the Lord Who ascends unto the clouds amid great glory,* and they then fall to the ground and say:* Glory to God Who ascends into heaven!
Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:
We extol You,* O Christ the Giver of life;* and seeing You go up to heaven in Your most pure body,* we praise Your holy Ascension.
Verse: O gates, lift high your heads; grow higher, ancient doors. Let Him enter, the King of glory!
Verse: The Lord has set His sway in heaven and His kingdom is ruling over all.
Verse: The Lord said to my lord: Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies under your feet.
Verse: O God, arise above the heavens; may Your glory shine on earth!
Verse: Arise, O Lord, by Your might! We shall sing Your praise and glorify Your almighty power.
Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Refrain (Bolharskyj): God ascends with jubilee; the Lord to the blast of trumpets* – to redeem Adam’s image.

Sessional Hymn (Tone 5, Podoben: Sobeznachalnoje slovo): You descended from heaven to the earth, O Christ,* and by Your ascension You wondrously raised up the race of Adam* which had been lying in the depths of the prisons of Hades.* And having taken our nature back to heaven,* You seated it with You on the Father’s throne* because of Your mercy and Your love for all.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 46 (Tone 4)
God is ascended with jubilee: and the Lord with the sound of trumpets.
Verse: All you nations, clap your hands: shout unto God with the voice of joy!

The third resurrectional Gospel: Mark 16:9-20; Having beheld the resurrection...; after Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): Today the powers on high see our nature in heaven,* and they marvel at this wondrous Ascension,* and they say to one another:* Who is this Who has just arrived in heaven?* But when they recognize their own Lord,* they order the gates of heaven to be opened.* With them let us praise unceasingly* the One Who shall come again from heaven in our flesh* as the judge of the universe and the almighty God.

Canon (Tone 5)

Hirmos 1: Our Savior and God led the people of Israel across the Red Sea as if on dry land and drowned Pharaoh and his whole army. Let us praise Him Who alone is worthy of our songs, for He is covered with glory.

Hirmos 3: O Christ, by the power of Your cross, strengthen our hearts so that we may sing and glorify Your saving ascension.

Hirmos 4: O Lord, I have heard Your voice and I recognized the power of Your cross, because through it paradise was opened; and I said: Glory to Your power, O Lord!

Hirmos 5: As we watch in the night and wait for morning, O Lord, we cry to You: Have mercy on us and save us, for You are truly our God and we know no other but You.

Hirmos 6: The abyss surrounds me completely; the sea monster holds me as if in a tomb; I cried to You, O Lover of mankind, and Your right hand has saved me.

Hirmos 7: O Savior Who saved the youths who sang to You in the furnace, blessed are You, O Lord and God of our fathers.

Hirmos 8: The Son of God, born of the Father before all ages, has taken flesh from the Virgin Mother in these last days. Praise Him, you priests and let the whole nation exalt Him forever.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted, but immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the 9th hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol Christ the Giver of life Who ascended from earth into heaven.

Hirmos: Surpassing our spirit and our understanding, you gave birth in the world and in time to the timeless Lord; with one voice and one heart, O Mother of God, we the faithful extol you.

Verse: Glory be to Your holy ascension, O Lord!
Seeing Your divinized flesh, O Christ, the angels on high said to each other: Truly this man is our God!

Verse: Glory be to Your holy ascension, O Lord!
O Redeemer of the world, Christ our God, the apostles contemplate Your divine exaltation: and in fear and in joy they extol You.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Rejoice, O holy Mother of Christ our God, for today you extol the One Whom you bore as you see Him carried by the angels from earth to heaven.

Verse: Extol, O my soul, the Ruler and Lord, Who ascended into heaven to the Father.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): Rejoice, O Queen and glorious Virgin Mother! What orator, rich in eloquence, could find the proper words to fashion a hymn of praise worthy of you? For every spirit shudders before the mystery of your holy birthgiving; and we also unite our voices to glorify you.

Exapostilarion: O Christ, You were raised up to heaven in the sight of Your disciples;* You again went up to share Your Father’s throne.* The angels who came to meet You at the heavenly gate cried out:* Open your gates and lift up your lintels* so that the King of glory may come in,* for our King comes again to the Source of light.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 1, Podoben – Nebesnych chynov): With the angels in heaven, let us praise on earth* our God Who ascends to His throne of glory,* and let us sing to Him:* Holy are You, O Father of heaven, O co-eternal Word, and most Holy Spirit.

As they gazed upon the wonder of Your ascension, O Savior,* the princes of the angels said to one another:* What is this sight that is before our eyes?* We see the form of a man,* but as God He is raised above the heavens in His body.

Seeing You ascend bodily from the Mount of Olives, O Word,* the men of Galilee heard the angels cry out to them:* Why do you stand there looking up?* He shall return in His flesh* in the same way that you have seen Him taken away.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): O our God, You were born in a manner of Your own choosing;* You appeared and suffered in the flesh as You willed;* You crushed Death through Your resurrection and ascended into glory;* and You sent down the divine Spirit upon us;* therefore, we sing a hymn of praise and glorify Your divinity.

After the great doxology, the troparion: You ascended in glory... (p. 1256); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
