MATINS

At God the Lord...: the Troparion of the feast, (p. 1319).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 3): Encircled by the light of the angelic hosts, O Lady,* and by the ranks of the apostles and prophets,* and receiving as the Mother of God their holy veneration,* visit us, your servants, and entreat Christ our God* to grant us His abundant mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 6): you are indeed the strength of the helpless,* O most pure Mother of God.* Because of this, we lowly ones glory in you.* Because of you, our hopes are high.* you are our protection and our mediatrix with God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O most holy Virgin,* and we honor your holy protection,* for you always pray to Christ for us.

Verse: He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High and abides in the shade of the Almighty.
Verse: He will conceal you with His pinions, and under His wings you will find refuge.
Verse: And I said, Who will give me the wings like a dove’s and I shall fly and come to rest.
Verse: To You my soul hastens; in the shadow of Your wings I seek shelter.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4): your most precious mantle glistens more brilliantly* than the gold and silver of the ark of old.* It is spread out not in substance but in spirit* by your pure and incorruptible hands,* and it mercifully protects those who honor the feast of your Protection, O Lady,* which we joyfully celebrate today.

Gradual – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 44 (Tone 4)
I will make your name remembered from generation to generation.
Verse: The richest among the people shall seek your favor.

Gospel: Lk 1:39-49, 56.

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 8): All the leaders of the heavenly armies* form a spiritual choir and rejoice with all of us* when they see the Lady and Queen of all praised by the faithful.* The spirits of the just also rejoice* as they witness the vision of the queen praying with outstretched arms.* she asks for peace in the world,* power and strength for our Church, and salvation for our souls.

Canon (Tone 4)

Hirmos 1: I will open my mouth, filled with the Spirit; I will sing a song to the Queen and Mother. I will come, rejoicing in the feast and I will extol all her glory.

Hirmos 3: In your divine glory, O Theotokos, living and inexhaustible fountain, spiritually establish your choir, which you have assembled; make them worthy of the crowns of glory.

Hirmos 4: He Who sits in glory on the throne of Divinity, Jesus, the Holy of Holies, came on a radiant cloud. With His holy arm He saved those who cry: Glory to Your power, O Christ!

Hirmos 5: All creation was awed by your divine glory, for you, O Virgin, knew no man, yet bore the God of all! you held in your womb the eternal Son, Who grants peace to those who extol you in song.

Hirmos 6: Let us believers clap our hands in gladness, celebrating the divine and holy feast of the Mother of God. By knowing God through the Theotokos, let us glorify Him Who was born of her.

Hirmos 7: The godly youths worshipped the Creator, not the creature; manfully they trampled on the flames, singing in joy: Blessed are You, most praised Lord, God of our fathers!

Hirmos 8: O pure Virgin, listen while Gabriel tells you the eternal plan of the Most High. Prepare to receive God, for through you the incomprehensible deigns to dwell with mortals. Therefore, I cry out in joy: All you works of the Lord, bless the Lord!

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted. After the intonation Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol the greatness of the protection of the ever-virgin Mother of God.

Hirmos: Let everyone on earth dance for joy in spirit. Let the heavenly ranks celebrate in honor of the sacred feast. O Mother of God, let them cry: Rejoice, O ever-blessed Theotokos and ever-Virgin!

Verse: O most holy Mother of God, pray for us!
Heed the supplication which Your Mother offers in behalf of us sinners, O most high King, Who sits at the right hand of the Father and is praised by the Seraphim; cleanse us of our sins and protect our nation through the prayers of the one who gave birth to You.

Verse: O most holy Mother of God, pray for us!
O Virgin chosen by God, we praise you in the words of the angel: Rejoice, for you have led Adam back to paradise. Rejoice, O hope of Christians who has routed the demons through your name. Rejoice, enlightener of souls and protectress of our city!

Glory be: Now and for ever: O holy Virgin Theotokos, receive the prayers of us all, who place our hope in you, so that we may not be cast down by our many sins. Deliver us from all danger and tribulation, for we glorify you and honor the feast of your Protection.

Verse: O my soul, extol Mary, the Mother of God, who prays without ceasing to Jesus Christ for us.

Katabasia: Let everyone on earth... (see above).

Exapostilarion: O most holy Lady, Virgin Mother of God,* extend your holy mantle over us;* guide and protect our rulers and all people from every evil,* and show us, O holy Lady, your loving protection.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 8, Podoben – O preslavnoho chudese): O Lady, we bow before you,* and humbly prostrating, we pray to you.* Rejoice, O glorious Virgin,* most blessed by God and heralded by prophets;* for in you, Christ our God came down as the dew.* In your maidenhood, pure and undefiled, you gave birth to Him.* you carried in your arms the Lord and Creator of all.* Implore Him now for us who faithfully glorify the feast of your Protection.

The angel choirs sing of you, O Virgin Mother of God.* The patriarchs join the priestly ranks and holy apostles in praising you.* They give service to you as to the Mother of God.* Having seen you pray to Christ our God, the Savior of all,* they ask you to pray to Him to save the world* and all those who sincerely honor you* and keep holy the feast of your Protection.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 8): O Mother of God,* you were made more holy than the ark of Aaron through the Holy Spirit.* With your mantle you shine more brilliantly than the rays of the sun.* you illumine the Church and dispel the darkness caused by our sins.* Deliver from danger and tribulations* all those who honor the feast of your Protection.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1319); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
