MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1289).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): The great leader of the bodiless armies descended to Nazareth* and standing before you, O most pure one,* announced the King, the infinite Lord of the ages to you.* He said to you: Rejoice, O blessed Mary,* incomprehensible and untold marvel,* for you are the renewal of the human race.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 3, Krasoti divstva tvojeho): Today all creation rejoices, for the archangel says to you:* Rejoice, O blessed, precious, and most pure Mother of Christ our God.* Today the pride of the serpent is brought low,* and the bond of Adam’s curse is being loosed.* We, therefore, call to you unceasingly:* Rejoice, O Lady Full of Grace!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

O most pure one,* imitating the speech of the archangel, we cry out to you:* Rejoice, O Full of Grace,* the Lord is with you!

Verse: O God, give judgment to Your king; to the son of the king justice.
Verse: The fruit of your womb I shall set upon My throne.
Verse: He shall descend like rain on the meadows, like raindrops on the earth.
Verse: For the Lord has chosen Zion; He has desired it for His dwelling.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Rejoice! says Gabriel to the holy and pure one,* for you shall conceive in your womb the infinite God* Who by His word created the universe.* To this, Mary responded: I know not man;* how then shall I bear a son?* Who has ever seen a birth without seed?* The angel replied to the Virgin Theotokos:* The Holy Spirit shall come upon you,* and the power of the Most High shall overshadow you.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 95 (Tone 4)
Day after day, announce the salvation of our God.
Verse: Sing a new song to the Lord;* sing to the Lord, all the earth!

Gospel: Lk 1:39-49, 56, (p. 1045). After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse as on Sunday; then the following stichera:

(Tone 2): Today Gabriel announces the good news to the Woman Full of Grace:* Rejoice, O Virgin who has not known wedlock;* do not fear the strangeness of my appearance,* for I am an archangel.* Formerly, the serpent was the cause of grief to Eve,* but now it is great joy that I announce:* You shall remain a virgin, and yet you shall give birth to the Lord.

Canon (Tone 4), (p. 1046).

Ode 9: Omit the Magnificat, but after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the 9th hirmos with its verse:

Verse: O earth, proclaim the good news of great joy. You heavens, sing the glory of God!

Hirmos (Tone 4): Let no unclean hand touch the living tabernacle of God; but let the lips of the faithful sing endlessly with joy to the Mother of God the greeting of the angel: Rejoice, O Woman Full of Grace; the Lord is with you!

Verse: Most holy Mother of God, save us!

You surpassed the laws of nature, O Virgin, by conceiving God in a manner beyond understanding. Although you were mortal by nature, you were not subject to the ordinary laws of motherhood. Therefore, it is fitting that you should be greeted with: Rejoice, O Woman Full of Grace; the Lord is with you!

Verse: Most holy Mother of God, save us!

Daniel called you a spiritual mountain; Isaiah, the Mother of God; Gideon saw you as fleece, and David called you a sanctuary; another called you a gate. Gabriel now cries out to you: Rejoice, O Woman Full of Grace; the Lord is with you!

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Mother of God, the Holy Scriptures mystically speak of you. In ancient times Jacob saw you prefigured in the ladder and said: This is the stairway on which God shall walk. Therefore, it is fitting that you should be greeted with: Rejoice, O Woman Full of Grace; the Lord is with you!

Verse: My soul extol the joy of the annunciation of the all-virgin Mary.

Katabasia: Let no unclean hand..., (see above).

Exapostilarion: The leader of the angelic hosts* was sent from God almighty to the pure Virgin* to announce the strange and ineffable miracle:* the incarnation of God and His birth from a virgin,* in order to refashion the human race.* Therefore, O peoples, proclaim with joy the renewal of the world.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 1, Podoben – Nebesnykh chynov): Gabriel descended to Nazareth from the heavenly heights.* He came to the Virgin Mary and cried out to her:* Rejoice, for you shall conceive a Son, more ancient than Adam,* the Creator of all ages, and Redeemer of those who cry out to you:* Rejoice, O most pure one!

Because of His utter compassion,* the co-eternal Word of the unbegotten Father* is now among those on earth,* not separating Himself from on high.* He had mercy on us who had fallen,* and He accepted the lowliness of Adam* and took upon Himself the nature which He did not have.

Gabriel brought greetings to the Virgin from heaven, saying:* You shall conceive and contain in your womb the One Whom all the universe cannot contain.* You will give birth to Him* Who proceeds from the Father before the dawn of time.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): That mystery which is from all eternity, is being revealed today.* The Son of God becomes the Son of Man.* He accepted the lowliest in order to give us the highest.* In times of old, Adam was deceived;* he desired to become like God and did not.* Now God becomes a man that He may make Adam God.* Let all creation be happy;* let nature dance with joy because the archangel stands in awe before the Virgin and greets her.* He brings the greeting which changes our grief into joy.* Through the mercy of Your compassion, You became incarnate;* O our God, glory to You!
