MATINS

After God the Lord...: the Troparion of the saints, (p. 1282), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p.1266).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Skoro predvary): Most radiant light-bearers of the Church of Christ,* you enlightened the world with your teachings, O God-inspired Fathers.* You defeated the heresies of the evil-minded* and extinguished the fiery threats of the blasphemers.* Therefore, as saintly bishops of Christ,* pray for us that we may be saved.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): O ever-glorious Virgin, Mother of Christ God,* Mary, bride of God and most pure help of the faithful,* deliver from every danger and misery all those who lovingly seek your protection,* for you are the only betrothed of God.

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): In the garden of the holy Scriptures,* you truly moved about as wise bees,* gathering from all the beautiful flowers* in order to offer the honey of your teachings to all the faithful.* Because of this, everyone joyfully calls out to you:* Even after your death, O blessed ones,* you are present among those who celebrate your memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O immaculate One, I am being tossed about in the violence of my passions.* I fervently call out to you:* Do not permit me to be lost in my misery,* for you gave birth to the Source of mercy.* We have no other hope but you.* Therefore, I place my trust in you* that I may not be the cause of joy and laughter for the enemy.* For you can do as you will* because you are the Mother of the God of all.

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O hierarchs of Christ,* and we venerate your holy memory,* for you pray to Christ our God for us.

Verse: They are happy whose life is blameless, who follow God’s law.
Verse: I put the law You have given before all the silver and gold in the world.
Verse: It was Your hands that made me and shaped me; help me to learn Your commands.
Verse: Turn and show me Your mercy; show justice to Your friends.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4): May the most wise teachers of the people, who glorified God by their deeds and words on earth, be glorified today because they pray for our salvation.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 131 (Tone 4)
Your priests shall be clothed with holiness;* Your faithful shall ring out their joy.
Verse: My lips will speak words of wisdom. My heart is full of insight.

Gospel: Jn 10: 9-16, (p. 768). After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: the verse as on Sunday, then the following stichera:

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): The grace flowed from your lips, O holy fathers. You were the shepherds of the Church of Christ, teaching your spiritual sheep to believe in the Holy Trinity, consubstantial in the one Godhead.

Canon (Tone 2): Come, let us the faithful..., (p. 756).

Ode 9 – Hirmos: Let us faithful with one mind extol with hymns the Word of God, Who, in His ineffable wisdom, came from God to renew Adam who, through eating, had grievously fallen into corruption. In an unspeakable manner, He became incarnate of the holy Virgin for our sakes.

Verse: O holy bishops of Christ, pray to God for us!

Behold, here is your orchard and here is your flock for whom you have labored, they are now gathered in unity. And with a single celebration, they praise the three of you in your beautiful union.

Verse: O holy bishops of Christ, pray to God for us!

It is not a two-edged sword, but a three-edged sword that was brandished against the enemies of grace. It is a single blade forged in heaven and finely honed on all three edges. Unceasingly it fights for the one Divinity with the triple brightness.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The wisest of teachers spoke well of the Son of God and your Son, O Mother of God, learning this mystery from divine revelation, and not from man. For this reason, they glorified you also, and extolled you as the Virgin Mother of God.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 3): In the shadow and the writings of the Law we behold an image, O faithful: Every male that opens the womb is consecrated to God. Therefore, we magnify the firstborn Word of the unbegotten Father, the firstborn Son of the Mother who knew not man.

Exapostilarion: Let us joyously praise the God-bearing fathers,* the three radiant lamps who are brighter than the rays of the sun.* They obtain the radiance from the original Source of light, the Trinity,* the three persons awesomely united above nature.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 5, Podoben – Radujsia): Rejoice, O trinity of bishops,* great defenders of the Church,* pillars of piety and fortress of the faithful,* successful opponents of those preaching heresy.* You explained the blessed teachings of Christ to the people,* and you nourished them by your deeds of virtue.* You are brilliant preachers by the grace of God* who taught the law of Christ to the faithful* and guided them to the entrance of paradise on high.* Intercede with Christ to send down great mercy on our souls.

Rejoice, O trinity of bishops,* earthly angels who have ascended into heaven.* You are the salvation of the world,* the joy of the human race, and teachers of the whole world.* You are defenders of the Word and wise healers of spiritual and bodily ills,* everflowing spiritual rivers which water the face of the earth with your words.* You are the foundation of theology and sublime speakers of golden words.* Intercede with Christ to send down great mercy on our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): Let us sound the trumpets of praise, for the Queen of all, the Virgin Mother,* looks down from on high to crown with blessings those who honor her.* Let kings and leaders come together* to praise the Queen who gave birth to the King. Because of His love for all,* He released those who had been condemned to death.* O shepherds and teachers,* come together and praise the most pure Mother of the Good Shepherd.* She is the lampstand that gleams like gold,* the light-bearing cloud more spacious than the heavens,* the living tabernacle and golden urn containing the manna,* the sealed door of the Word and refuge of all Christians.* Let us praise her with God-inspired songs, saying:* O palace of the Word,* make us lowly ones worthy of the kingdom of heaven,* for nothing is impossible through your intercession.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the saints, (p. 1282); Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
