MATINS

After God the Lord...: the Troparion of the feast.

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Showing the change that mortals will undergo, O Lord, when they enter Your glory at Your second and awesome coming,* You were transfigured on Mount Tabor.* Elijah and Moses conversed with You;* and seeing Your glory, the three disciples whom You had chosen* were struck with Your splendor, O Lord.* As You covered them with Your brightness,* also send Your light upon our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): You were transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Jesus;* a bright cloud covered Your apostles with Your glory as with a tent, O Lord.* They cast their faces to the ground,* unable to gaze upon the inaccessible glory of Your resplendent face,* O Christ our God and eternal Savior.* As You covered them with Your brightness,* also send Your light upon our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Christ the Source of life,* and we venerate the holy transfiguration* of Your most pure flesh.

Verse: The Lord is great and worthy to be praised in the city of our God and on His holy mountain.
Verse: Who shall climb the mountain of the Lord? Who shall stand in His holy place?
Verse: Send down Your light and Your truth.
Verse: Tabor and Hermon shout with joy at Your name.
Verse: We shall walk in the light of Your face, O Lord, and shall forever rejoice in Your name.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4): When You went up to the mountain with Your disciples, O Lord,* and You were resplendent with the glory of the Father,* Elijah and Moses stood there with You;* for the Law and the Prophets serve You as God. The Father attested to Your divine filiation and called You His beloved Son.* With You we praise Him in the unity of the Holy Spirit.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 88 (Tone 4)
Tabor and Hermon* shout with joy at Your name.
Verse: The heavens are Yours; the world is Yours.

Gospel: Lk 9: 28-36.

About eight days after He said this, He took Peter, John, and James and went up the mountain to pray. While He was praying His face changed in appearance and His clothing became dazzling white. And behold, two men were conversing with Him, Moses and Elijah, who appeared in glory and spoke of His exodus that He was going to accomplish in Jerusalem. Peter and his companions had been overcome by sleep, but becoming fully awake, they saw His glory and the two men standing with Him. As they were about to part from Him, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good that we are here; let us make three tents, one for You, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” But he did not know what he was saying. While he was still speaking, a cloud came and cast a shadow over them, and they became frightened when they entered the cloud. Then from the cloud a voice that said, “This is My chosen Son; listen to Him.” After the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. They fell silent and did not at that time tell anyone what they had seen.

After Psalm 50:
Glory be: (Tone 2): Today the whole world is filled with joy,* for Christ is transfigured before His disciples on Mount Tabor.

Verse: Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness. In Your compassion, blot out my offense.

(Tone 5): Having revealed a small ray of Your divinity* to those who climbed the mountain with You, O Savior,* You made them partakers of Your boundless glory.* Therefore, they cried out in awe to You:* It is good for us to be here.* Together with them, we shall forever praise You, O Christ our Savior,* Who was transfigured for us.

Canon (Tone 4)

Hirmos 1: When Israel walked upon the deep sea as upon dry land, they saw Pharaoh, their pursuer, drowning, and they exclaimed: Let us sing a hymn of victory to God.

Hirmos 3: The weak have clothed themselves with strength, and the weapon of the mighty has become powerless; therefore, my heart is strengthened in the Lord.

Hirmos 4: O Christ, our God, Your wondrous plan of salvation has been revealed to me: how Your birth from a Virgin would rescue from the power of evil those who call You by saying: Glory to Your power, O Lord!

Hirmos 5: In the beginning You, as their Creator, separated the light from the darkness so that Your works may glorify You in light, O Christ. Now guide our steps in the light of Your paths.

Hirmos 6: When beset with trials, I called to the Lord, and the God of my salvation heard me.

Hirmos 7: The three youths of Babylon, who were sons of Abraham, trampled upon the flames in the fiery furnace, singing this song of praise: Blessed are You, O God of our fathers!

Hirmos 8: Zealously aflame with love of God; the three youths courageously conquered the threat of the wicked king in Babylon. They stood in the midst of the fire as though covered with dew and sang: All you works of the Lord, bless the Lord!

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the 9th hirmos with the verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol the Lord transfigured on Mount Tabor.

Hirmos 9 (Tone 4): you gave birth without blemish; for it was God Who came forth from your womb, appearing in the flesh upon the earth and dwelling among us. Therefore, O Mother of God, we all extol you.

Verse: Glory to Your holy transfiguration, O Lord!
Overcome with awe and enlightened with a heavenly brightness, the disciples looked at one another and fell to the ground in their fear and worshiped You, O Master of all.

Verse: Glory to Your holy transfiguration, O Lord!
Confirming this mystery, the voice of God was heard from the cloud; for the Father of lights spoke to the apostles and said: This is My beloved Son. Hear Him!

Glory be: Now and for ever: We praise You, along with the Father and the Spirit, O faithful Image of the One-Who-Is, O Seal that cannot be taken away or changed, Son and Word, Wisdom and Arm of God, Right Hand and Power of the Most High.

Verse: O my soul, extol Him, Who on Mt. Tabor revealed the glory of His divinity.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 8): you are the mystical paradise,* O Mother of God, which brought forth Christ.* For He planted for us on earth the life-giving tree of the cross.* For this reason, as we raise it aloft and bow before it,* we extol you, O Mother of God.

Exapostilarion: O Word and unchangeable Light,* O Light of the unbegotten Father,* today we see in Your light on Tabor the light of the Father and the light of the Spirit* which gives light to the whole world.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4, Zvanyj svyshe byv): Before Your noble suffering and cross, O Master,* You took Your chosen apostles to Mount Tabor,* showing them Your glory.* When they saw You transfigured and more brilliant than the sun,* they fell to the ground and cried out:* You are the eternal Light and the radiance of the Father;* and although unchanged, You appear in the flesh.

O God the Word, You are from all eternity,* and You are clothed with light as with a robe.* Transfigured before Your disciples, You shone more brightly than the sun.* Moses and Elijah stood at Your side* revealing You as Lord of the living and the dead.* They glorified Your ineffable work of salvation,* Your mercy, and great compassion,* by which You saved the world which was lost in sin.

You were born of a virginal cloud and became flesh* and were transfigured on Mount Tabor, O Lord.* A bright cloud surrounded You;* the voice of the Father clearly told the disciples that You are His beloved Son,* for You are the same essence as He and You share His throne.* At this sight, Peter spoke with wonder and said:* It is good for us to be here.* he did not realize what he said, O most merciful Benefactor.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 8): Christ took His disciples, Peter, James, and John,* and was transfigured on a high mountain in their presence.* His face became as bright as the sun,* and His garments were whiter than the snow.* Moses and Elijah appeared and spoke with Him,* and a bright cloud came over them;* a voice was heard from the clouds, saying:* This is My beloved Son in Whom I am well pleased. Hear Him!

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1310); the litanies; and the great dismissal.

The Blessing of Fruit
(usually takes place after the Divine Liturgy)

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy.

Priest: O Lord our God, Who have blessed the cycle of the year and have crowned it with fruit-bearing; Who in Your great patience have commanded the earth to bring forth its fruits for our nourishment, grant that the partaking of the first-fruits and harvest of summer may be for the health of our body and soul, and bless us with an abundant increase in all good things:

Exclamation: For You are the Provider of all good things, and we give glory to You, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

Then the priest sprinkles the fruit with holy water, saying:
These fruits are blessed by the sprinkling of this holy water, in the name of the Father, † and of the Son, † and of the Holy Spirit. † Amen.
