Note: If Vespers is celebrated on Saturday or Sunday evening without the Divine Liturgy, then Holy God... is omitted. After the Gospel which the priest himself reads (the deacon reads the Gospel only at the Divine Liturgy): the litany Let us all say...; Deign, O Lord...; the litany Let us complete our evening prayer...; then the blessing of water begins, (p. 831). At the end: Wisdom... and the great dismissal.

GREAT COMPLINE WITH LITIYA

Great Compline is celebrated according to the rules given on pp. 64-82; then we sing the following stichera of Litiya; the rest as on Vespers with Litiya, from (p. 31).

Stichera of Litiya

(Tone 4): The One Who clothes Himself with light as with a robe* deigned, for our sakes, to become as we are.* Today He is clothed in the streams of the Jordan* even though He has no need to be purified.* He refashions us through the cleansing that He receives.* What a marvelous wonder!* He creates anew without fire* and refashions without tearing apart;* He grants salvation to those enlightened in Him,* Christ our God, the Savior of our souls.

Today Christ is baptized;* He emerges from the waters and uplifts the world with Him.* He beholds the opening of the heavens* which Adam had closed for himself and his descendants.* The Spirit testifies to His divine nature,* for He is in accord with His own. A voice is heard from the heavens,* giving witness to the One Who has descended;* for He is the Savior of our souls.

Upon touching Your immaculate head,* the hand of the Baptist trembled.* The streams of the Jordan turned back,* feeling unworthy to serve You.* If the waters trembled before Joshua, the son of Nun,* why should they not shudder before their Creator?* You have completed all that was assigned to You, O Savior,* so that You might redeem the world by Your Epiphany;* for You alone love the human race.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 8): Today all creation is enlightened.* Today all nature rejoices,* those in heaven and those upon the earth.* Angels and people join together* in the presence of the King and His army.* Let us hasten to the Jordan;* let us witness to John as he baptizes a sinless and uncreated head.* Let us sing out in one voice,* echoing that of the apostle:* The grace of God which brings salvation to all has come forth,* enlightening the faithful and granting them great mercy.

Aposticha

(Tone 2): O Lord, when John saw You approaching him at the Jordan River, he cried out:* How do You, O Lord Who are sinless, come to me Your servant?* In whose name shall I baptize You?* In the name of the Father Whom You possess in Yourself?* In the name of the Son, while You are the very Son in the flesh?* In the name of the Holy Spirit Whom You grant to the faithful* with the breath of Your mouth?* O God Who has appeared to us, have mercy on us.

Verse: The sea fled at the sight; the Jordan turned back on its course.

The waters have seen You.* When the waters saw You, O Lord, they trembled,* for the very Cherubim do not dare to look upon Your glory,* nor can the Seraphim rest their eyes upon You.* They stand in awe before You,* some on guard, others glorifying Your might.* Together with them, we proclaim Your praise, O merciful One, and say:* O God Who has appeared to us, have mercy on us.

Verse: Why was it, O sea, that you fled, that you turned back, Jordan, on your course?

Today the Creator of heaven and earth* approaches the Jordan River in the flesh;* the One Who is free from sin seeks to be baptized* in order to cleanse the human race from the error of the enemy;* the Master of all is baptized at the hand of the servant* in order to grant us the cleansing through water.* Therefore, let us cry out to Him:* O God Who has appeared to us, glory to You!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): When John, the bright lamp that was born of a barren mother,* perceived that Christ, the Sun Who had risen from a virgin,* was now asking for baptism, he cried out with joy:* O Lord, sanctify me by Your Theophany.

Canticle of Simeon; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; the troparion of the feast: At your baptism in the Jordan, O Lord..., (p. 1278); then the blessing of bread; Psalm 33; and the great dismissal.

MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1278).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti tvojeho): O Christ our Savior, You appeared in the Jordan and were baptized by the Forerunner,* and the Spirit testified that You are the beloved Son.* The Holy Spirit descended upon You* and manifested that You are coeternal with the Father.* Having been enlightened by You, we cry out:* Glory to the one God in the Holy Trinity!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the same).

(Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachal’noe Slovo): You have wrapped Yourself in the streams of the Jordan.* O Word of God, You gloriously clothe Yourself in light,* thereby renewing the nature of Adam* which was destroyed by the sin of disobedience.* Therefore, we praise You and glorify Your holy Epiphany.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the same).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Christ the Giver of life,* for You were baptized for us this day in the flesh by John* in the waters of the Jordan.

Verse: O God, be gracious and bless us, and let Your face shed its light upon us, and have mercy on us.
Verse: The Lord thundered from heaven; the Most High made His voice resound.
Verse: The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the waters have lifted up their voice.
Verse: Through the sea was Your path, through the mighty waters.
Verse: The waters saw You, O God; they trembled even to their depths.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Refrain (Bolharskyj): You are being baptized by a servant in the Jordan, my Jesus, Who illumines the whole world.

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): O faithful, come and behold the place of the baptism of Christ* so that we may follow Him to the streams of the Jordan* and thus draw near to the one who cries out in the wilderness:* See the inexpressible loving-kindness of the Creator of Adam* Who bows His head to the hand of a servant.* Therefore, let us cry out to Him:* You have come and appeared in the Jordan to sanctify the waters.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 113 (Tone 4)
The sea fled at the sight;* the Jordan turned back on its course.
Verse: Why is it, O sea, that you flee? O Jordan, that you turn back?

Gospel: Mk 1: 9-11.

After Psalm 50:
Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): All creation is filled with joy today;* Christ has appeared in the Jordan.

Verse: Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness, in Your compassion, blot out my offense.

(Tone 6): God the Word manifested Himself in the flesh to the human race.* He stood in the Jordan to be baptized,* and the Forerunner said to Him:* How can I extend my hand and touch the head of Him Who governs all things?* Even though You were an infant born of Mary,* I know that You are the eternal God.* You are praised by the Seraphim and yet You walk on earth,* and the servant has not learned how to baptize the Master.* O ineffable Lord, glory to You!

Canon (Tone 2)

Hirmos 1: The Lord, powerful in battle, separated the foundations of the sea and led His servants across on dry ground. But He covered their enemies with the waters, for He is covered with glory.

Hirmos 3: The Lord, Who bestows power to kings and raises up the strength of His anointed, is born of a Virgin and now draws near for baptism. Therefore, let us, the faithful, cry out: No one is as holy as our God, and no one is as righteous as You, O Lord.

Hirmos 4: O Lord, he whom You called the voice of one crying in the wilderness, heard Your voice when You thundered upon the waters, bearing witness to Your Son. Having been filled with the Spirit, he cried out: You are Christ, the wisdom and power of God.

Hirmos 5: Jesus, the Prince of life, has come to set free Adam, the first-created; and although as God He has no need of cleansing, for the sake of the fallen human race He is cleansed in the Jordan. He destroyed the enemy in the waters and grants the peace that is beyond all understanding.

Hirmos 6: The voice of the Word, the candlestick of Light, the morning star, and forerunner of the Sun, proclaimed in the wilderness to all peoples: Repent and be purified while time still remains. For behold, Christ is at hand, the One Who delivers the world from corruption.

Hirmos 7: As they walked about in the fiery furnace, the three youths were preserved from all harm by the presence of an angel of God and the refreshing wind as cool as dew. Strengthened with these helps, they gratefully cried out: Blessed are You and praise above all, O God of our fathers.

Hirmos 8: As the Babylonian furnace poured forth dew, it prefigured a wondrous mystery: how the Jordan received in its streams the immaterial fire and encircled the Creator when He was baptized in the flesh. All you faithful, glorify and praise Him above all forever.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; but immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the 9th hirmos with its verse.

Verse: O my soul, extol the Lord, who is being baptized in the Jordan river.

Hirmos (Tone 2): No tongue is capable of praising you worthily, and no mind, however superhuman, is able to extol you, O Mother of God. Good as you are, accept our faith, for you know our love of God. You are the guide of Christians, and we glorify you.

Verse: Glory be to Your holy baptism, O Lord!

O my soul, extol the One Who comes to the Jordan to be baptized. O David, come in spirit to those who are now to be baptized, and sing: Draw near to God in faith and receive enlightenment. The fallen Adam cried out in his poverty to the Lord and received a listening ear; He has come to the waters of the Jordan, thereby refashioning Adam who had fallen into corruption.

Verse: Glory be to Your holy baptism, O Lord!

Isaiah said: Wash yourselves clean! Put away your misdeeds from before my eyes. All you thirsty, come to the water; for Christ will wash with the water of renewal those who run to Him in faith, and He baptizes them with the Spirit Who will provide them with eternal life.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O eternal King! Having cleansed human nature with the pure waters of the Jordan, You perfect it in Confirmation by the imparting of the Holy Spirit, so that, having brought low the arrogant power of darkness, You may replace it with everlasting life.

Verse: O my soul, extol the Virgin, the most pure Mother of God, Who is greater in honor than the hosts on high.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 2): The wonder of your birth surpasses all understanding, O most pure Virgin, for through you, O blessed Mother, we received perfect salvation. We, therefore, fittingly extol you, our benefactress, and offer you a hymn of thanksgiving.

Exapostilarion: The Savior, Who is grace and truth, has been revealed in the waters of the Jordan;* and He shed light upon those who sleep in darkness and shadow.* The Light to Whom no one can draw near is revealed today.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 1): Christ our God is revealed today;* as Light from Light He shines upon the world.* All you faithful, let us bow down before Him.

O Christ our Master,* as servants, how can we praise You in a fitting manner?* For You have renewed us in the waters.

O Savior, You were baptized in the Jordan and have sanctified the waters.* By submitting Your head to the hand of a servant,* You healed the passions of the world.* How unspeakable is the mystery of Your plan of salvation.* O Lord Who loves all people, glory to You!

Glory be: Now and for ever: The true Light has appeared to bestow enlightenment upon all.* The all-pure Christ is baptized with us;* He sanctifies the water and it becomes a cleansing for our souls.* All that which appears outward and visible is earthly;* and that which is understood by the mind is greater than the heavens.* Salvation is bestowed through washing,* and the Spirit is received through water.* By descending into the water we ascend to God.* How wonderful are Your works, O Lord, glory to You!

After the great doxology: troparion of the feast, (p. 1278); the litanies, and the great dismissal.
