MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the saint, (p. 1313), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 2), (p. 1263).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachalnoje Slovo): Let us gather together, O believers,* and in unison praise him who was the mediator between law and grace;* for he came and preached repentance to us,* and with courage he openly denounced Herod,* and thus he was beheaded.* Now dwelling with the angels, he intercedes with Christ for our salvation.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): We, your servants, gratefully sing your praises from our hearts* and earnestly beg for your mercies, O Lady.* We call out to you: O all-holy Virgin, deliver us from all enemies, visible and invisible,* and save us from all threats;* for you alone are our help and protection.

(Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachalnoje Slovo): Let us in hymns exalt the Baptizer of Christ,* the victorious sufferer of the passion, John the Forerunner.* he was revealed to us in the womb as a prophet,* and like a bright star he came forth from the barren woman as a luminary for the whole world.* he intercedes with the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Show your protection, help and mercy to your servants, O pure Virgin,* and allay the surging of our vain thoughts.* Raise up my fallen soul, O Theotokos, for you can do whatever you wish.

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O John the baptizer of the Savior,* and we venerate your most honorable beheading.

Verse: Behold, I flew into the desert, and there found rest.
Verse: I have not hidden Your justice in my heart.
Verse: I have declared Your faithful help and Your salvation.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8): O faithful, let us honor the memory of the prophet, martyr, and baptizer of the Savior, for he is an angel in the flesh. he rebuked Herod for his unjust union and condemned him. And now because of a dance and an oath, his venerable head is cut off. he descends into Hades to announce the good news of the resurrection from the dead, and he unceasingly prays for the salvation of our souls.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps. 115 (Tone 4)
Precious in the eyes of the Lord* is the death of His faithful.
Verse: How can I repay the Lord for His goodness to me?

Gospel: Mt 14:1-12. After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 2): O John the baptizer and preacher of repentance,* you sanctified the earth when you were beheaded.* you made plain to believers the law of God,* abolishing disobedience to the law.* Therefore, since you stand by the throne of Christ the heavenly King,* beseech Him to have mercy on our souls.

Canon

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 8): Heaven was struck with amazement, and the earth shook with fear as our God appeared in the flesh. your womb has become more spacious than the heavens, O Mother of God. Therefore, the leaders of the heavenly hosts commend both angels and people to extol you.

Verse: Holy and great John, forerunner of the Lord, pray to God for us!

Prophet born of a prophet, and baptizer of the Lord, you were the voice crying in the desert: Repent! you reproached Herod for his immoral and godless actions. you also hasten to proclaim the kingdom of God to those held captive in Hades.

Verse: Holy and great John; forerunner of the Lord, pray for us!

When the voice that cried out in the desert was heard throughout Hades: Open, O gates, for the King of the universe is entering, it was then that humility rose and pride was brought low.

Glory be: Now and for ever: The human passions tremble and the devils flee in terror from the power given to you by the grace of God. Therefore, from every assault, O Forerunner of the Lord, protect your flock who always glorify you with faith.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 8): you are the mystical paradise, O Mother of God, which brought forth Christ. For He planted for us on earth the life-giving tree of the cross. For this reason, as we raise it aloft and bow before it, we extol you, O Mother of God.

Exapostilarion: With songs of praise, let us crown the forerunner* who is known to be greater than the prophets,* and he became the foremost of the apostles.* His head was cut off for the sake of the law of the Lord.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 8, Podoben – O prseslavnoho chudese): O what a wondrous mystery!* The holy head which the angels surround with honor* is carried by a sinful and wicked daughter to her adulterous mother,* whom John rebuked because of her lawless life.* How incomprehensible is Your long-suffering,* O Christ lover of mankind!* Because of Your long-suffering,* save our souls, O only kindhearted One!

O how the heart of Herod is hardened!* He scorns God by disobeying the law,* yet he pretends to keep his oath.* Not content with adultery,* he now becomes a murderer;* and yet he pretends to appear sad.* By Your surpassing compassion,* O Christ our God, save our souls,* for You alone are compassionate.

Glory be: O wonder beyond all understanding!* The seal of the prophets and the earthly angel was offered as a prize for an immoral dance.* The tongue constantly speaking of God is sent beforehand* to preach Christ to those who are in Hades.* By Your surpassing providence,* O Christ our God, save our souls,* for You alone are compassionate.

Now and for ever: O Holy Lady, receive the supplications of your servants,* and deliver us from all sorrow and tribulation.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the saint, (p. 1313), Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 2), (p. 1263); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
