MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the saint, (p. 1236); Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): O bishop and father Nicholas, while alive in Myra,* you manifested yourself as a learned man anointed with spiritual myrrh.* you made the world fragrant with the myrrh of your miracles.* you continue to pour out your myrrh, both through the fragrance of your words* and through our continual remembrance of you.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O all-immaculate one,* you conceived in your womb by the power of the Holy Spirit* and without corruption you gave birth to the Creator of all, God and Builder.* As we extol Him, we praise you, O Virgin,* as the palace of the King of all and protectress of the world.

(Tone 4): you are the leader of the faithful.* you shelter and protect them, O blessed one.* you deliver them from all tribulation,* O most beautiful glory and boast of bishops,* O venerable Nicholas.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O all-pure Virgin, who gave birth to the eternal God!* Pray to Him unceasingly with St. Nicholas,* that He grant us forgiveness of sins before death and amendment of life,* for we extol you, O ever-praised Virgin,* with fitting faith and love.

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol you,* O holy bishop Nicholas,* and we venerate your memory,* for you pray to Christ our God for us.

Verse: My lips will speak words of wisdom. My heart is full of insight.
Verse: Your justice I have proclaimed in the great assembly.
Verse: They are happy who dwell in Your house, forever singing Your praise.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachalnoje Slovo): Let all the faithful devoutly praise Nicholas,* the God-inspired and wise archbishop,* as the gracious helper and defender of the poor and troubled.* he intercedes with the Lord* for all those who faithfully celebrate his blessed memory.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon (Tone 4), (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 115 (Tone 4)
Precious in the eyes of the Lord* is the death of His faithful.
Verse: How can I repay the Lord for His goodness to me?

Gospel: Jn 10:9-16 (p. 768). After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday; then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): O holy Nicholas, faithful servant of God* and worker in the vineyard of Christ,* your life, in accordance with the meaning of your name,* has given light to old knowledge.* The splendor of your countenance gave witness to your innocence of soul.* your life was an example of the quiet meekness of the Word;* now you are glorious among the saints.* Implore Christ in behalf of our souls.

Canon: resurrectional (Tone 2) and the following:

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 2): God and Lord, Son of the Father without beginning, having become enfleshed from the Virgin, has appeared to us, to enlighten those in the darkness and to gather the dispersed. For this reason, we extol the ever-praised Mother of God.

Verse: Holy father Nicholas, pray to God for us!
The arrows of the deceiver have reached me, but I trust in your protection and come to you, father. Drive away from me every snare of the Evil One, so that I may cry out to you: Rejoice, O Nicholas!

Verse: Holy father Nicholas, pray to God for us!
you put Arius to shame, and quenched the flame of heresies. you heard those bound in the prisons of the governors and received from them a greeting: Rejoice! We too cry out to you: Rejoice, O all-blessed Nicholas.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Queen, who gave birth to the King and carried in your arms Him, Who sustains all creation, save, O most holy Lady, those who extol you.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 1): I contemplate a divine and marvelous mystery: heaven has become a cave; the throne of Cherubim, a virgin; and the manger, an honorable place in which lies Christ God, the Incomprehensible. Let us praise and extol Him.

Exapostilarion: Let us all praise Nicholas, the great shepherd, bishop, and leader of Myra, for he saved many who were unjustly condemned to death. he also appeared to the emperor and Ablabius in a dream, putting an end to the unjust decree.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Virgin, you gave birth to Christ, Wisdom personified, the ever-existing Word, and Healer of all. Heal the wounds of my soul and remove from my heart all lustful thoughts.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 5): Rejoice, O bright star of the eternal light of the Master!* Rejoice, radiance of the mystical light,* O bishop of Christ, Nicholas!* Hasten, father, and send up your most pure supplications in our behalf to the Lord,* that He deliver us from every misfortune* and heal our unbearable pains!* Since you are our intercessor,* we cry out to you with repentant hearts and faith:* pray to Christ, that He grant us great mercy.

Rejoice, O star of the hierarchs,* inexhaustible abyss of miracles,* ornament of the Church, bright star!* Enlighten us all, O blessed one, with your holy rays,* for you, O holy one, are bright as radiant lightning flashes,* an unshakeable pillar of faith* for those, who with love observe your holy memory.* pray to Christ, that He grant our souls great mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Rejoice, O seal of the prophets* and subject of the God-preaching apostles!* For you, O pure one, gave birth to the true God,* Who became enfleshed beyond all understanding and words!* Therefore, having received from Him the original dignity* and enjoying the delights of paradise,* we venerate you with hymns* as the mediatrix of such a distinction and as a powerful supplicator.* Having become enriched by you, O most pure one,* we have become worthy of the everlasting life of your Son,* Who generously grants us great mercy.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the saint, (p. 1236); Glory be: Now and for ever: resurrectional theotokion (Tone 4), (p. 1266); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
