GREAT COMPLINE WITH LITIYA

Great Compline is celebrated as on pp. 64-82; then we sing the following stichera of litiya; and all the rest as on Vespers with Litiya (from p. 31).

Stichera of Litiya

(Tone 1): May heaven and earth rejoice prophetically this day.* May angels and people spiritually celebrate,* for God appeared in the flesh* to those groping in the darkness and resting in a shadow.* Having been born of a Virgin,* a cave and a manger received Him.* Shepherds relate a miracle;* the magi from the East bring gifts to Bethlehem,* while we, with unworthy lips, render Him angelic praise:* Glory to God in the highest and peace on earth,* for the hope of nations has arrived.* Having come, He has saved us from hostile bondage.

Today heaven and earth unite, for Christ is born.* Today God came to earth in the flesh,* and the human race was lifted up to the heavens.* Today, for the sake of all, He is seen in the flesh,* the One Who by nature is invisible.* Let us glorify Him, singing:* Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace* which Your coming has bestowed on us.* O Savior, glory to You!

Seeing the one who was made to the image and likeness of God* fall because of his transgression,* Jesus lowered the heavens and came down.* And without changing, He took up His dwelling in a virgin womb* that He might fashion anew the corrupt Adam who cried to Him:* Glory to Your epiphany, O my Deliverer and my God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Angels rejoice in heaven, and people exalt today,* and all creatures leap with joy* because of the birth of the Lord Savior in Bethlehem;* for all deceit of idolatry has ceased,* and Christ reigns forever.

Aposticha

(Tone 2): A great and glorious miracle was wrought today:* the Virgin gives birth without corrupting her virginity;* the Word is made flesh without division from the Father;* the angels and shepherds give praise, and we exclaim with them:* Glory to God in the highest and peace on earth.

Verse: From eternity You have been born of My womb, vows the Lord Who does not repent.

(Tone 3): Today the Virgin gives birth to the Creator of all,* paradise offers a cave, and a star presents Christ as the Sun in darkness;* the Magi with their gifts, enlightened by faith, adore;* the shepherds behold a miracle,* while the angels exclaim: Glory to God in the highest.

Verse: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at My right hand.

When the Lord Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea,* the magi, coming from the East, adored God made man,* and unfolding their treasures, they brought precious gifts:* the purest of gold as to the eternal King;* and incense as to the God of all;* and myrrh as to the immortal dead of three days.* Come all nations, let us adore Him Who is born to save our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): You have dwelt in a cave, O Christ God,* and a manger received You;* the shepherds and the magi adored You.* Then were the predictions of prophets fulfilled;* and angelic powers stood amazed, singing and saying:* Glory to Your coming, for You alone love mankind.

The Canticle of Simeon; Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the troparion of the feast: Your birth, O Christ our God..., (p. 1334); then the blessing of the bread, Psalm 33; and the great dismissal.

MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1334).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): O long-suffering Savior,* for our sake, as an infant, You willingly allowed Yourself to be placed in a manger with animals.* The shepherds together with the angels praised You, saying:* Glory and praise to Christ our God* Who is born on earth and deifies the human race.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): O Theotokos, you carried in your womb, in the flesh,* the One Who is eternal, incomprehensible, and consubstantial with the unseen Father,* the One and indivisible divinity of the Trinity.* O ever-praised one, He shines forth your grace into the world.* Therefore, we unceasingly cry out to you: Rejoice, O pure Mother of God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Life-giving Christ,* for our sake You are now born in the flesh* from the unbetrothed, all-pure Virgin Mary.

Verse: The Lord has sent deliverance to His people.
Verse: I shall install Him as the only-begotten, above all the kings of the earth.
Verse: Before Him all kings of the earth shall bow.
Verse: The Lord said to Me: You are My Son. It is I Who have begotten You this day.
Verse: He shall say: You are My Father.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Bolharskyj refrain: Come, let us sing with the angelic choir: Glory to God in the highest, Who was born in a cave.

Sessional Hymn: (Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Come, O believers, let us see where Christ is born.* Furthermore, with the magi, the kings from the East,* let us follow wherever the star goes.* The angels are praising Him there unceasingly;* the shepherds are singing a worthy song, saying:* Glory to God in the highest;* glory to Him Who is born of the Virgin* in a cave in Bethlehem of Judea.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 109 (Tone 4)
Before the daystar, like the dew, I have begotten You.* The Lord has sworn, and He will not repent.
Verse: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit at My right hand till I make Your enemies Your footstool.

Gospel: Mt 1:18-25 (p. 1158). After Psalm 50:

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): All creation is filled with joy today. Christ is born of a Virgin!
Verse: Have mercy on me, God, in Your kindness, in Your compassion, blot out my offense.

(Tone 6): Glory to God in the highest and peace on earth. Today Bethlehem receives the One Who at all times sits with the Father. Today the angels sing the praises of the newborn Infant. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace and good will to all.

Canon (Tone 1)

Hirmos 1: Christ is born, let us glorify Him. Christ comes down from heaven; let us go out to meet Him. Christ lives on earth, let us exalt in joy. All you faithful, sing to the Lord, for He has been glorified.

Hirmos 3: To Christ our God, Who is the only-begotten Son of the Father from before all ages, and in these latter times has become flesh of the Virgin without seed, let us cry aloud: You are our strength, glory to You, O Lord!

Hirmos 4: O Christ, You have come forth from the Virgin as the rod of the root of Jesse and the flower that blossomed from his stem. You became flesh from her who knew not wedlock, from the mountain overshadowed by the forest, O God Who are not formed from created substance. Glory to Your power, O Lord.

Hirmos 5: Since You are a God of peace and a Father of mercies, You have sent Your angel of great counsel to us to bring us peace. Thus we are directed towards the light of the knowledge of God, and at the night vigil we glorify You, O Lover of mankind.

Hirmos 6: Jonah had dwelt like a babe in the womb before the sea monster spew him forth; the Word dwelt in the womb of the Virgin, taking flesh from her. Although born from her, He kept her all-pure. Since Christ Himself was not subject to incorruptibility, He kept His Mother free from the same.

Hirmos 7: The youths who had been raised to fear God were not threatened by the fiery torments. They denounced the wicked decree of the tyrant, and standing in the midst of the flames, they sang: Blessed are You, O God our Fathers.

Hirmos 8: The dew-moistened furnace was the image of an incomprehensible wonder. It did not burn the youths entrapped there, just as the fire of the Godhead did not consume the Virgin’s womb in which He dwelt. Therefore, let us praise God, saying: Let all creation bless the Lord and exalt Him above all forever.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; instead, after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the following hirmos with its verse.

Verse: O my soul, extol the most holy Virgin Mother of God, who is more worthy of honor than the angels of heaven.

Hirmos (Tone 1): I contemplate a divine and marvelous mystery: heaven has become a cave; the throne of cherubim, a Virgin; and the manger, an honorable place in which lies Christ God, the Incomprehensible. Let us praise and extol Him.

Verse: Glory to Your holy birth, O Lord.
Observing the unusual path of a mysterious and newly shining star which was brighter than any other heavenly light, the magi learned that Christ the King was born on earth in Bethlehem for our salvation.

Verse: Glory to Your holy birth, O Lord.
The magi asked of Herod: Where is the newborn King whose star we have seen? We have come to worship Him. The enemy of God was troubled and irrationally schemed how to kill Christ.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Herod asked the magi, who had come to Bethlehem to worship Christ with their gifts, when they had first seen the star which directed them. But the magi returned to their own country by the same star, thereby deceiving Herod, the killer of the innocents.

Verse: O my soul, extol our God, born in the flesh from the Virgin.

Katabasia: I contemplate a divine and marvelous mystery... (see above).

Exapostilarion: Our Savior, the rising Sun more brilliant than any other sun,* has visited us today from on high.* We once were in the darkness and the shadow of error,* but now we have found the truth;* for the Virgin gives birth to the Lord our God in Bethlehem.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4): O holy ones, be happy;* O heavens, be glad; and all you mountains, sing with joy* because Christ our God today is born.* Behold, the Virgin is enthroned like the Cherubim,* holding in her arms the incarnate Word of God.* The shepherds glorify with hymns the newborn Babe;* the magi offer gifts to their Master;* and the angels sing praises and say:* O incomprehensible Lord, glory to You!

O Virgin Theotokos, you gave birth to the Savior.* you overthrew the ancient curse of Eve.* As a mother you were the benevolence of the Father.* you bore in your womb the incarnate Word of God.* We cannot understand this mystery,* but we glorify it with one faith.* We also join you in praise to say:* O ineffable Lord, glory to You!

Come, all you peoples,* let us praise the Mother of our Savior,* for she remained a virgin after childbirth.* Rejoice, O holy city of our King and God.* The Savior has chosen to live in you,* and in you He has worked out our salvation.* With Gabriel, we sing your praises;* and with the shepherds we glorify you, saying:* O Mother of God, implore Him Who became incarnate from you,* that He may save our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): Today Christ is born of the Virgin in Bethlehem.* Today the eternal One has a beginning;* today the Word becomes incarnate.* All the heavenly powers rejoice,* and all who dwell on earth are happy.* The magi offer gifts to the Master;* the shepherds proclaim the marvel;* and we cry aloud unceasingly:* Glory to God in the highest* and on earth, peace and good will to all.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1334); the litanies; and the great dismissal.
