FEBRUARY 2
THE PRESENTATION OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

(A feast of the Mother of God)

VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 1): O Simeon, tell us whom you are joyfully carrying into the Temple.* To whom are you saying:* Now You may dismiss your servant, O Lord,* because my eyes have seen my Savior.* He is the child born of the Virgin.* He is the Word and God of God.* O Lord, Who for our sake was incarnate and saved the world,* to You we bow in worship.

O Simeon, now receive the One* Whom Moses the lawgiver had foreseen through the cloud on Sinai.* He has become a child and submits Himself to the Law.* This is He Who spoke through the Law and Whom the prophets foretold.* O Lord, Who for our sake was incarnate and saved the world,* to You we bow in worship.

O faithful, come, let us welcome Christ* and receive Him with hymns of praise and glory.* He is the salvation Simeon has seen.* He is the One Whom David foretold* and of Whom the prophets have spoken.* O Lord, Who for our sake was incarnate and inspired the Law,* to You we bow in worship.

(Tone 2): Simeon now receives below in his earthly arms the One* Whom the ministers at the liturgy on high entreat with trembling,* and Who was prophesied to become incarnate.* Seeing the heavenly God as mortal man,* he is ready to withdraw from earthly things and joyfully cries out:* Glory to You, O Lord, the unsetting Light,* that uncovers those in darkness.

Today Simeon takes in his arms the Lord of glory,* the One Whom Moses formerly saw in the darkness* when he received the tablets of the Law on Mount Sinai.* This is He Who speaks through the prophets;* He is the Creator of the Law.* This is He Whom David announced.* He is awesome to all,* yet He has great and abundant mercy.

The pure Virgin brings the sacred One into the sanctuary to the holy priest.* Simeon extends his hands, receives Him joyously in his arms, and cries out:* O Master, now You may dismiss Your servant in peace,* according to Your word, O Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Today the gates of heaven swing open,* for the Word of the Father Who has no beginning* has received beginning in time without any loss to His divinity.* As a child of forty days He is offered by a virgin Mother* in the temple according to the Law.* The Elder Simeon receives Him in his arms and cries out:* Dismiss me, O Master, for my eyes have seen Your salvation;* O Lord, Who came into the world to save us, glory to You!

The entrance; O Joyful Light; Prokimenon of the day; and readings.

Lector: A reading from the Book of Exodus.

On that same day the LORD brought the Israelites out of Egypt,... the LORD spoke to Moses and said, “Consecrate to me every first-born that opens the womb among Israelites, both of man and beast, for it belongs to me.” Moses said to the people, “Remember this day on which you came out of Egypt, that place of slavery. It was with a strong hand that the LORD brought you away. Nothing made with leaven must be eaten.” When the LORD, your God, has brought you into the land of the Canaanites, which He swore to you and your fathers He would give you, you shall dedicate to the LORD every son that opens the womb; and all the male firstlings of your animals shall belong to the LORD. Tell the Israelites: When a woman has conceived and gives birth to a boy, she shall be unclean for seven days, with the same uncleanness as at her menstrual period. On the eighth day, the flesh of the boy’s foreskin shall be circumcised. “When the days of her purification for a son or a daughter are fulfilled, she shall bring to the priest at the entrance of the meeting tent a yearling lamb for a holocaust and a pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering. If, however, she cannot afford a lamb, she may take two turtledoves or two pigeons, the one for a holocaust and the other for a sin offering. The priest shall make atonement for her, and thus she will again be clean.” (Exodus 12:51-13:3,11-12; Leviticus 12:2-3,6,8).

Other readings: Isaiah 6: 1-12; Isaiah 19:1,3-5, 12, 16, 19-22).

Stichera of Litiya

(Tone 1): The Ancient of Days, Who of old gave the Law to Moses on Sinai appears this day as an infant. The Creator of the Law fulfills the Law. He is brought into the temple and is given over to the Elder. The just Simeon receives Him, and, beholding the fulfillment of the divine promise, joyfully cries out: My eyes have seen the mystery hidden from all eternity. It has been revealed in these latter days. The Light has radiated the darkness of the unbelieving Gentiles and gives glory to the newly chosen Israel. Therefore, let Your servant depart from the bonds of this flesh to the wondrous unending life that knows no age. And we pray You to grant great mercy to the world.

He, Who once gave the Law to Moses on Sinai, today submits Himself to the prescriptions of the Law. In His compassion He has become like us for our sakes. Now the pure God, as a holy infant having opened a pure womb, is being offered as God to Himself. He is freeing us from the curse of the Law and granting light to our souls.

The Creator of heaven and earth is carried today in the arms of the Elder Simeon. Inspired by the Holy Spirit, he cried out: Now I am set free, for I have beheld my Savior.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): He Who is ancient of days and young in the flesh is being brought to the temple by His virgin Mother. He fulfills the promise of His own law. Simeon receives Him and says: Now You may dismiss Your servant, according to Your word, in peace, for my eyes have seen Your salvation, O Lord.

Aposticha

(Tone 7): Adorn your bridal chamber, O Zion, and welcome Christ the King.* Welcome Mary, the gate of heaven,* for she has appeared as a cherubic throne* on which the King of glory is seated.* Indeed, the Virgin has become a cloud of light,* bearing in her arms the eternal Son.* Simeon received Him in his arms* and proclaimed to the people that He is the Master,* the Master of life and death, and the Savior of the world.

Verse: Now You may dismiss Your servant, O Lord, according to Your word, in peace.

The all-pure Mother carried into the temple* the One Who comes forth from the Father in all eternity* and from the womb of a Virgin in time.* The Lawmaker of Mount Sinai submits to the Law* and is presented to the elderly and holy one so that he may see the Promised One.* When Simeon received Him in his arms, he joyfully cried out:* This is God, co-eternal with the Father,* and the Savior of our souls.

Verse: A light of revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of Your people, Israel.

Mary, the Mother of God, carried in her arms* the Lord Who rides the chariot of the Cherubim and is praised with the hymns of the Seraphim.* He was incarnate of her without human seed;* He is the Lawgiver Who fulfills the precepts of the Law.* She handed Him over into the arms of the aged priest.* Holding the Life in person,* Simeon asked to be delivered of his present life, saying:* Dismiss me now, O Master, that I may tell Adam* how my eyes have seen the eternal God* Who was made man without undergoing change,* and Who brought about the salvation of the world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 8): He Who rides on the Cherubim and is praised by the Seraphim* is now being brought into the holy temple according to the Law.* He is sitting in the arms of an old man as though upon a throne.* From Joseph He receives God-pleasing gifts, a pair of turtle doves,* and from the newly-chosen people of the Gentiles, an undefiled Church.* The two doves indicate that He is the head both of the Old and New Testaments.* As for Simeon, when he saw what had been revealed come to pass,* he received the child and blessed the Virgin Mother of God,* pointing out to her the sufferings that she would bear.* He asked the Lord to be released from life, saying:* Now You may dismiss me, O Lord, as You have promised;* for my eyes have seen You, the eternal Light,* the Lord and Savior of all Christian people.

The blessing of the bread; the Troparion of the feast, (p. 1283).
