DECEMBER 24
THE GREAT (HOLY) HOURS

(dark-red vestments)

If the eve of the Nativity falls on a Saturday or a Sunday, then the Great (Holy) Hours are taken on Friday.

FIRST HOUR

Priest: Blessed be our God, always, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; the usual beginning; then: Come, let us adore..., (p. 10-11).

Psalm 43 (Messianic)

My heart overflows with noble words;* to the king I must speak the song I have made.
My tongue as nimble* as the pen of a scribe.
You are the fairest of the children of men and graciousness is poured upon Your lips:* because God has blessed You for evermore.
O mighty One, gird Your sword upon Your thigh;* in splendor and state.
Ride on in triumph for the cause of truth and goodness and right,* take aim with Your bow in Your dread right hand.
Your arrows are sharp, peoples fall beneath You.* The foes of the king fall down and lose heart.
Your throne, O God, shall endure for ever;* a scepter of justice is the scepter of Your kingdom.
Your love is for justice; Your hatred for evil;* therefore God, Your God, has anointed You with the oil of gladness above other kings.
Your robes are fragrant with myrrh and aloes and cassia;* from ivory palaces stringed instruments make You glad.
Daughters of kings are among Your ladies of honor;* at Your right hand stands the queen in gold of Ophir.
Listen, O daughter, give ear to my words:* forget your own people and your father’s house.
So will the king desire your beauty:* He is your lord, pay homage to Him.
And the people of Tyre shall come with gifts,* the richest of the people shall seek your favor.
The daughter of the king is clothed with splendor,* her robes embroidered with pearls set in gold.
She is led to the king with her maiden companions;* they are escorted amid gladness and joy;* they pass within the palace of the king.
Sons shall be yours in place of your ancestors:* you will make them princes over all the earth.
May this song make your name for ever remembered;* may the peoples praise you from age to age.

Psalms 5, (p. 150), and Psalm 45 may also be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia!: Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 4): At that time Mary registered..., (p. 1334).

Now and for ever: What shall we call you, O Full of Grace? A heaven, for you have borne the Sun of justice? A paradise, for you have brought forth the Flower of immortality? A virgin, for you have remained undefiled? A mother, holding in her holy arms the Son Who is the God of all? Intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

Then the following stichera are sung:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): O Bethlehem prepare yourself;* O manger, adorn yourself as it behooves!* O cave, get ready to receive, for Truth has come, and the shadow has passed,* for God has come forth from a Virgin and appeared to mankind;* He has taken upon Himself our likeness and has deified our human nature.* Because of this, Adam is renewed together with Eve, and they cry out:* The mercy of God has appeared on earth to save our human race.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Thus spoke Joseph to Mary: Mary, what has happened to you?* I do not understand; and I tremble.* Therefore, I shall quickly and secretly put you away.* Mary, what is it that I behold in you?* Instead of honor, I behold shame;* instead of joy – grief; instead of praise, you have brought me disgrace.* I can no longer bear the reproach of the people.* I accepted you immaculate from the priests in the temple of the Lord;* and now what do I behold?

Having opened the holy doors, the priest (vested in the phelonion) and deacon intone:

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be with all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

Prokimenon: Ps 2 (Tone 4)
The Lord said to Me: You are my Son.* It is I Who have begotten You today.
Verse: Ask and I shall bequeath You the nations, put the ends of the earth in Your possession.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of the prophet Micah.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Thus says the Lord: / But you Bethlehem-Ephrathah, / too small to be among the clans of Judah, / From you shall come forth for me / one who is to be ruler in Israel; / Whose origin is from old, / from ancient times. / (Therefore the Lord will give them up, until the time / when she who is to give birth has borne, / And the rest of His brethren shall return / to the children of Israel.) / He shall stand firm and shepherd His flock / by the strength of the LORD, / in the majestic name of the LORD, His God; / And they shall remain, for now His greatness / shall reach to the ends of the earth (5:1-3).

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Brethren: In times past..., (p. 1141).

The deacon, having incensed the altar and the people, intones:
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to the Holy Gospel.
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Priest: A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew.
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You.
Gospel: Mt 1:18-25 (read by the priest).
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir reads:
Let my way be straight according to Your word;* let no sin overcome me.* Save me from the wickedness of evil-doers,* and I will keep Your commandments.* Let Your face shine upon Your servant,* and teach me Your laws.

Let my mouth be filled with Your praise, O Lord,* and let me sing Your glory and magnificence all the day long.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following kontakion:

(Tone 3): Today the Virgin gives birth to the eternal One, the earth offers the Uncontainable a cave, the angels with the shepherds glory, and a star guides the magi, for to us has been born a Child – the eternal God.

Lord, have mercy (40x).
O Christ, our God, in all times..., (p. 155).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim, and by far more glorious than the seraphim; ever a virgin, you gave birth to God the Word, O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Give the blessing, father, in the name of the Lord.

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may His countenance shine upon us, and may He have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of the First Hour
O Christ, the true Light Who enlightens and sanctifies everyone in the world, mark us with the light of Your countenance so that we may see the unapproachable radiance. Let our life be straight along the path of Your commandments, through the prayers of Your most pure Mother and of all Your saints.

If the following Hour is taken, then begin: Come, let us adore..., and then the following Hour; if not, then conclude as follows:

Priest: Glory be to You, Christ our God, our hope, glory be to You.
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy (3x). Give the blessing!

Priest: Christ our true God, Who was born in a cave in Bethlehem of Judah and allowed Himself to be laid in a manger for the salvation of our souls, through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, of the holy, glorious and praiseworthy apostles, of our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and all the saints, will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
Choir: Amen.
