MATINS

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4, Podoben – Skoro predvary): You hearkened the call of God, O most blessed Theodosius,* leaving the world, and all its beauty.* Having endured corporal discomforts* and spiritually fortified yourself in the dark and confining cave,* you bravely repelled the legions of demons.* Therefore, we always faithfully glorify your memory with hymns.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Triodion or: O Mother of God, the mystery..., (p. 296).

(Tone 8): With streams of tears you bedewed your soul, O God-wise Father,* and gleaned a rich harvest of virtues.* As a pastor of the sheep, you tended them, O venerable Father,* on the pasture of abstinence.* Thus, having renounced earthly life in glory,* you, father Theodosius, joined the community of ascetics.* Therefore, we cry out to you:* Pray to Christ God, that He grant forgiveness of sins to those who with love honor your holy memory.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Triodion or: O good One..., (p. 410).

After the Polyeleos the Exaltation is sung (see the common service of a venerable, p. 1197).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8): You truly were sanctified from childhood, O blessed Theodosius,* and, on earth, lived the life of an angel.* You mortified the body, O venerable one,* worthily imitating Anthony of the Caves,* thus pleasing the most Holy Trinity.* You also, O glorious one, have led numerous ascetics to the zeal of your divine life.* Beseech, O God-bearing father, Christ God,* that He grant forgiveness of sins to those who with love venerate your memory.

The rest is taken from the common service for a Venerable, (p. 1198).

Canon – from the Triodion and the following:

Ode 9 – Hirmos (Tone 8): Everyone trembled who heard of the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High of His own free will took upon Himself a body, and in a virginal womb He became man. For this reason, we, the faithful, extol you, O most pure Godbearer.

Verse: Venerable father Theodosius, pray to God for us!

Rejoice, O land of Rus-Ukraine! For you have received from the Lord a treasure, which no one can steal – the God-blessed and great helper and fervent defender Theodosius! Therefore; exult with the assembly of the ascetics, O Kyiv, capital of Ukraine!

Verse: Venerable father Theodosius, pray to God for us!

Today we have gathered together for your feast, in order to glorify the Lord, Who inspired you to the good works you have accomplished. Therefore, beseech Him, O holy one; that He deliver from the snares of the enemy your flock, which you, O wise one, have merited through your prayers.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Savior, Who, after Your birth, preserved from corruption her, who gave birth to You, spare me when You sit in judgment of my deeds. Do not remember my sins or transgressions, for You, the Lover of mankind, are merciful and without sin.

Katabasia: from the Triodion.

Exapostilarion: O father of the venerable ascetics, Theodosius!* Having received into your heart the light of the Trinity in one essence,* you enlightened the pious ones,* living in a cave together with the great Anthony, in the company of the angels.* Together with them do not forget those who with faith glorify you.

Glory be: Now and for ever: from the Triodion.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 2, Podoben – Jehda ot dreva): You were completely wounded by the faith* and love of Christ, O venerable father.* Following Him, you renounced the world, your home, and family,* and hastened to the venerable Anthony.* From him you learned unspeakable things;* and that which ear had not heard had entered your heart.* With him, we devoutly praise you, O Theodosius.

You desired an upright life of patience and love,* of humility and all-night prayers and abstinence by which you mortified the urgings of the flesh.* For this reason, having received a heavenly reward,* you now are rejoicing with choir of ascetics. Do not forget, O blessed one,* to beg forgiveness of sins for those who worthily praise you.

Glory be: (Tone 6): O venerable father, throughout the earth the glory of your struggles have resounded,* for this reason, you received a reward in heaven for your labors.* You have destroyed the demonic legions and have joined the angelic choir,* having imitated their pure life.* With confidence in Christ,* beseech Him to grant to the world peace and to our souls great mercy.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or the following: I place all my hope in you, O Mother of God;* shelter me under your mantle.

MAY 6
THE RIGHTEOUS JOB
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 4, Podoben – Dal jesy znamenijie): O righteous, kind-hearted, sincere, spotless, faithful and blessed Job!* Fleeing from every kind of evil,* you adorned yourself with true virtues and radiant piety.* For this reason, we extol you today,* and joyfully celebrate your holy and glorious memory.

O long-suffering Job, adorned with the riches of righteousness,* as though with royal purple,* and with mercy and truth as though with a divine diadem,* you mastered raging passions.* For this reason, O glorious one,* you passed over to the spiritual kingdom,* in order to be with the eternal King.

Let us extol Job, who triumphed over temptations.* The wounds of his body made him as though an immovable pillar;* he became known to all as the bulwark of fortitude.* With his wisdom he even broke the sting of the devil.* Let us praise the divine and wise, and spotless holy one,* fortress of the righteous.

The rest is from the Triodion or the Octoechos.

MAY 8
SAINT JOHN THE THEOLOGIAN
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 1, Podoben – Nebesnykh chynov): As witness of revelations beyond words* and interpreter of the sublime mysteries of God,* O son of Zebedee,* you have written the gospel of Christ for us.* You taught us to glorify the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Divinely moved lyre of heavenly canticles,* you are the mystical writer* and the God-inspired voice melodiously singing the divine hymns.* Pray for the salvation of our souls.

O beloved of God, with your thundering voice* you declared the wisdom of God.* You constantly proclaimed aloud the hidden word by frequently saying: In the beginning was the Word.* You have illumined all with the knowledge of God.

(On Sept. 26, three more stichera are taken from the common service of an apostle).

Glory be: (Tone 6): O apostle of Christ, evangelist and theologian,* you were the mystic of the ineffable mysteries.* You proclaimed to us the untold teachings of Wisdom.* You clarified for the faithful that the Word was present to God in the beginning.* You cast aside the words of the heretics and rejected their false teachings.* You appeared as the favorite and beloved friend of Christ,* even as the thundering Isaiah and Moses who saw God.* Having boldness before Him, earnestly pray for our souls.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or the dogmaticon.

The entrance; O Joyful Light; Prokimenon of the day; and readings:

Lector: A reading from the first letter of St. John.

If anyone says, “I love God,” but hates his brother, he is a liar; for whoever does not love a brother whom he has seen cannot love God Whom he has not seen. This is the commandment we have from Him: whoever loves God must also love his brother. Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten by God, and everyone who loves the Father loves [also] the One begotten by Him. In this way we know that we love the children of God when we love God and obey His commandments. For the love of God is this, that we keep His commandments. And His commandments are not burdensome, for whoever is begotten by God conquers the world. And the victory that conquers the world is our faith. Who [indeed] is the victor over the world but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? (I, 4:20-5:5).

Other readings: 1 Jn 3:21-4:6; 1 Jn 4:9-16, (p. 763).

Aposticha

(Tone 1): O apostle, rivers of theology poured out from your precious mouth.* The Church of God has drunk from them* and in true faith adores the consubstantial Trinity.* O John the Divine,* pray to the Holy Trinity to strengthen the Church and to save our souls.

Verse: Through all the world their voice resounds; their message reaches to the ends of the earth.

O disciple of the Savior, O celibate and theologian,* Christ our God entrusted the Virgin Theotokos to you.* You protected her as the most cherished one.* Therefore, intercede that our souls may be saved.

Verse: The heavens proclaim the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth the work of His hands.

As an eye-witness of the ineffable mysteries,* you proclaimed that the eternal Word was in God and that He truly is God.* O Apostle John, you reclined upon the breast of Christ.* O delight of the Trinity, O unshakable fortitude of Ephesus and Patmos, help us!* O blessed Theologian, pray that those who honor you faithfully will be delivered from the wicked enemies of both body and spirit.

Glory be: (Tone 4): O beloved disciple, at the Lord’s supper you reclined on the breast of Christ the Master.* From that place you understood things ineffable,* and your heavenly voice thundered to all: In the beginning was the Word;* the Word was in God’s presence, and the Word was God.* The true light which gives light to everyone was coming into the world.* Christ is God and the Savior of our souls.

Now and for ever: from the Triodion or the following: O all-pure One, turn your ear..., (p. 272).
