MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1323).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 1, Podoben – Hrob tvoj, Spase): Together with the prophets we glorify You,* Who, by nature, are the eternal King.* You are the Star of Jacob, the Man of Israel, Ruler on his throne,* the Leader Who shall become his prince in Israel.* Glory to Your kingdom, O Christ!* Glory to Your authority!* Glory to Your mighty dominion, O only Lover of mankind!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the same).

(Tone 3, Podoben – Krasoti divstva tvojeho): The angels in heaven marvel at the splendor of Your kingdom,* and the people on earth rejoice.* By virtue of Your authority, the whole universe stands and all that it holds.* Through the goodness of Your power, our hearts have become soft as wax in fire;* and, with the blood of a royal Heart,* we all have enrolled ourselves under the one kingship of the Divinity.* Therefore, we cry out to You:* Jesus, our King, have mercy on us!

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the same).

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* Christ our King,* Who sits upon the throne of God,* and we glorify Your universal rule.

Verse: I will give You the nations for an inheritance, and the ends of the earth for Your possession.
Verse: God is king over all the earth; sing hymns of praise.
Verse: For kingship belongs to the Lord, the ruler over the nations.
Verse: I will make Him the first-born, highest of the kings of the earth.
Verse: And His throne as the days of heaven.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): Come, O faithful, and let us see where Christ rules!* He lies in the manger as if upon a throne,* granting peace to the world;* He hangs on a tree on Golgotha,* and overcomes the laws of nature;* He dwells with us on the Eucharistic altar – meek and humble of heart;* He sits in heaven at the right hand of the Father, and rules over the universe.* Therefore, having renounced ourselves,* let us join His kingdom, glorifying Him as our King.

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 144 (Tone 4)
Your reign is a reign for all ages,* Your dominion for all generations.
Verse: The Lord prepared His throne in heaven, and His kingdom rules over all.

Gospel: Lk 19:12-15; 27-28.

(The Gospel is read by the priest).

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): As sovereign King You invested Your apostles with Your authority* and sent them to preach the kingdom;* through them You destroyed the pagan idols;* and kings, having abdicated their purple and diadems,* descended from their thrones and, falling down before You,* worshiped the might of Your kingdom.* O almighty Lord, glory to You!

Canon – resurrectional (Tone 2) and the following:

Ode 9: Omit the Magnificat, but immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the hirmos with its verse:

Verse: My soul, extol Christ the King, Who rules over the whole universe.

Hirmos (Tone 2): God the Lord, Son of the Father without beginning, having become incarnate of the Virgin, appeared to us to illumine those in darkness, and to collect the scattered. Therefore, we extol you ever-praised Mother of God.

Verse: Glory be to You, Christ our King, glory be to You.
Most sweet Jesus, our King! Through the prayers of Joseph, protector of Your kingdom, enlighten our path and open to us the door of Your Heart, so that, saved by You, we may enter it and glorify Your royal love of mankind.

Verse: Glory be to You, Christ our King, glory be to You.
Holy Spirit, illuminator of the apostles of Christ’s kingdom! Reveal to us all the decrees of our King, in order that, renewed by Your grace, we may be strengthened by the power of His might and glorify You together with the Father and the Son.

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Mother of God, our hope and joy of the Kingdom of Christ and harbor of those weakened in battle! Strengthen us and make us firm in our imitation of Christ the King, and save those who extol you.

Katabasia: God and Lord, Son of the Father... (see above).

Exapostilarion: Our King and Enlightener has visited us from on high as the Light of the world.* Whoever follows Him does not walk in darkness,* for He has the life-giving light.* Therefore, in Christ we are all – children of light and children of day,* and not of night, nor of darkness.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 4): By nature, Christ, the King of earthly kings,* sprouted forth as a branch of righteousness from the eternal God,* and, in the flesh, from David, as from a root.* In His mercy, He purified us of our sins with His most sacred blood,* and gathered us into His holy kingdom,* so that we may glorify His rule, for the salvation of our souls.

Rejoice, O Zion, and preach the good news,* for it is your God Who reigns.* He sits on the throne of mercy and truth in the tabernacle of David,* judging and seeking judgment, and quickly administering justice.

Who is able to express, O Christ our King,* the power and glory of Your rule,* which has no limits neither in heaven nor on earth?* Every place, time, and creature is subject to it.* It will destroy every dominion, authority, and power.* Therefore, we bow before the might of Your power,* so that, following Your will in all things,* we may attain everlasting life.

Open your doors, O faithful!* Open your hearts, so that Christ, the King of glory,* Who rules from sea to sea* and from the river to the ends of the earth, may enter.* He will destroy all weapons,* and will grant to us peace and great mercy.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 2): Always protected by Your rule, O Christ,* we remain in Your service,* and acknowledge You as our King and Sovereign* and honor Your Vicar whom You have established on earth* as the Chief Shepherd in Your kingdom.

After the great doxology: the troparion of the feast; the litanies; and the great dismissal.
