JANUARY 5
THE GREAT (HOLY) HOURS

(dark-red vestments)

If the eve of the Theophany falls on a Saturday or on a Sunday, then the Great Hours are taken on Friday.

FIRST HOUR

Priest: Blessed be our God, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen. Glory be to You, our God...; (the usual beginning to Come, let us adore..., p. 10-11).

Psalm 26

The Lord is my light and my help; whom shall I fear?* The Lord is the stronghold of my life; before whom shall I shrink?

When evil-doers draw near to devour my flesh,* it is they, my enemies and foes, who stumble and fall.

Though an army encamp against me, my heart would not fear;* though war break out against me, even then would I trust.

There is one thing I ask of the Lord, for this I long, to live in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life,* to savor the sweetness of the Lord, to behold His temple.

For there He keeps me safe in His tent in the day of evil;* He hides me in the shelter of His tent, on a rock He sets me safe.

And now my head shall be raised above my foes who surround me* and I shall offer within His tent a sacrifice of joy, I will sing and make music for the Lord.

O Lord, hear my voice when I call;* have mercy and answer.

Of You my heart has spoken: “Seek His face.”* It is Your face, O Lord, that I seek.

Hide not Your face from me, dismiss not Your servant in anger;* You have been my help, do not abandon or forsake me, O God my help!

Though father and mother forsake me,* the Lord will receive me.

Instruct me, Lord, in Your way, on an even path lead me;* when they lie in ambush protect me from my enemy’s greed.

False witnesses rise against me,* breathing out fury.

I am sure I shall see the Lord’s goodness* in the land of the living.

Hope in Him, hold firm and take heart.* Hope in the Lord!

Psalms 5, (p. 150), and Psalm 22 may be taken.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).
Lord, have mercy. (3x).

Glory be: (Tone 4): After Elijah had gone up..., (p. 1277).

Now and for ever: What shall we call you, O Full of Grace? A heaven, for you have borne the Sun of justice? A paradise, for you have brought forth the Flower of immortality? A virgin, for you have remained undefiled? A mother, holding in her holy arms the Son Who is the God of all? Intercede with Him for the salvation of our souls.

Then we sing the following stichera:

(Tone 8, Samohlasen): As man You came to the river Jordan, O Christ King,* and You hasten, O Gracious One,* to receive the baptism of a servant* from the hands of the Forerunner for our sins,* O Lover of mankind.

Glory be: Now and for ever: To the voice of the one crying in the wilderness:* Prepare the way of the Lord;* You came, O Lord, as a servant seeking to be baptized* even though You had no sin.* When the waters saw You, they trembled in fear* like the Forerunner who exclaimed:* How can a lamp give light to the Light?* How can a servant touch his Master?* Rather, O Savior, bless the waters and me,* for You take away the sin of the world.

Having opened the holy doors, the priest (vested in the phelonion), and the deacon intone:

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be to all.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

Prokimenon: Ps 17 (Tone 4)
The Lord thundered from heaven; the Most High made His voice resound.
Verse: I love You, Lord, my strength, Lord, my rock, my fortress, my deliverer.

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of Isaiah.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Thus says the Lord: The desert and the parched land will exult; / the steppe will rejoice and bloom. / They will bloom with abundant flowers, / and rejoice with joyful song. / The glory of Lebanon will be given to them, / the splendor of Carmel and Sharon; / They will see the glory of the LORD, / the splendor of our God. / Strengthen the hands that are feeble, / make firm the knees that are weak, / Say to those whose hearts are frightened: / Be strong, fear not! / Here is your God, / He comes with vindication; / With divine recompense / He comes to save you. / Then will the eyes of the blind be opened, / the ears of the deaf be cleared; / Then will the lame leap like a stag, / then the tongue of the dumb will sing. Streams will burst forth in the desert, / and rivers in the steppe. / The burning sands will become pools, / and the thirsty ground, springs of water; / The abode where jackals lurk / will be a marsh for the reed and papyrus. / A highway will be there, / called the holy way; / No one unclean may pass over it / nor fools go astray on it. / No lion will be there, / nor beast of prey go up to be met upon it. / It is for those with a journey to make, / and on it the redeemed will walk. / Those whom the LORD has ransomed will return / and enter Zion singing, / crowned with everlasting joy; / They will meet with joy and gladness, / sorrow and mourning will flee. (35:1-10).

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Acts of the Apostles.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: “And as John was completing his course, he would say; ‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not He. Behold, one is coming after me; I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of His feet.’ My brothers, children of the family of Abraham, and those others among you who are God-fearing, to us this word of salvation has been sent. The inhabitants of Jerusalem and their leaders failed to recognize Him, and by condemning Him they fulfilled the oracles of the prophets that are read sabbath after sabbath. For even though they found no grounds for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have Him put to death, and when they had accomplished all that was written about Him they took Him down from the tree and placed Him in a tomb. But God raised Him from the dead, and for many days He appeared to those who had come up with Him from Galilee to Jerusalem. These are [now] His witnesses before the people. We ourselves are proclaiming this good news to you that what God promised our ancestors. (13:25-32).”

The deacon, having incensed the altar and the people, intones:
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to the holy Gospel;
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with your spirit.
Priest: A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew.
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You.
Gospel: Mt 3:1-12 (read by the priest alone).
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You.

The holy doors are closed, and the choir reads:
Let my way be straight according to Your word; let no sin overcome me. Save me from the wickedness of evil-doers, and I will keep Your commandments. Let Your face shine upon Your servants; and teach me Your laws.

Let my mouth be filled with Your praise, O Lord, and let me sing Your glory and magnificence all the day long.

Holy God; Trinity most holy; Our Father; and the following Kontakion:

(Tone 4): Today the Lord stood in the waters of the Jordan telling John:* Do not be afraid to baptize Me,* for I have come to save Adam, the first created.

Lord, have mercy (40x).
O Christ our God..., (p. 155).
Lord, have mercy (3x).

Glory be: Now and for ever:
More honorable than the cherubim,* and by far more glorious than the seraphim;* ever a virgin, you gave birth to God, the Word;* O true Mother of God, we magnify you.

Give the blessing, father, in the name of the Lord.

Priest: May God be merciful to us and bless us; may He cause His countenance to shine upon us, and have mercy on us.
Choir: Amen.

Prayer of the First Hour
O Christ, the true Light Who enlightens and sanctifies everyone in the world, mark us with the light of Your countenance so that we may see the unapproachable light. Let our life be straight along the path of Your commandments, through the prayers of Your most pure Mother and of all Your saints. Amen.

If the Third Hour is to follow, then it begins as follows: Come let us adore.... Otherwise, the following dismissal is taken:

Priest: Glory be to You, O Christ our God, our hope; glory be to You!
Choir: Glory be: Now and for ever: Lord, have mercy. (3x). Give the blessing!

Priest: Christ our true God, Who deigned to be baptized in the river Jordan by John for our salvation through the prayers of His immaculate Mother, and of our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints; will have mercy and save us, for He is good and loves mankind.
