AUGUST 7-12
POSTFEAST OF THE TRANSFIGURATION
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 2, Jehda ot dreva): Come, let us faithfully celebrate the brilliant, divine transfiguration.* Having been renewed in spirit, we shall climb to the summit of virtue;* and having learned with the apostles the revelation of the strange mysteries, we shall glorify the Lord and Savior.

Rejoice and be happy, O faithful!* The Church now celebrates this precious and bright feast.* The Master of all is transfigured.* He is resplendent in the dawn of ineffable splendor,* shining more brightly than the sun.

This is the God and the Creator of all.* Through His great mercy He took on the appearance of a slave.* He now heals the wounds of ancient times.* By His gleaming countenance He revealed the glow of divinity in His body.* The terrified apostles fell to the ground;* they bowed before the Master of all.

Three stichera and Glory be: of the saint.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): O God of goodness, Your light has sanctified the whole universe, and You were transfigured on the high mountain, revealing Your power to Your disciples. You have redeemed the world from sin. Therefore, we cry out to You: O Lord of mercy, save our souls!

On Friday and Saturday evenings: the Dogmaticon of the tone of the week. On the evening of August 6: the entrance; and the great Prokimenon: What God is great..., (p. 25); on Saturday: The Lord reigns....

Aposticha

(Tone 6, Podoben – Tredneven voskres jesy): In Your compassion, O Christ,* You appeared from the Virgin* in the humanity of the first Adam;* indeed, You became the new Adam,* O my Savior. You were transfigured on Mount Tabor,* and thus You revealed Your divinity.

Verse: The heavens are Yours; the world is Yours.

The crowns of grace and the law* were amazed to see Your holy transfiguration on Mount Tabor, O Christ.* Together with them we bow down to You, to the Father, and the Divine Spirit.

Verse: Tabor and Hermon shout with joy at Your name.

Creation is brightly illumined by Your transfiguration* in the presence of the holy apostles on Tabor, O Christ.* Indeed, You revealed to Moses and Elijah* that You are God, more radiant than the sun.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 5): You were transfigured in glory on Mount Tabor, O Christ our God,* and You showed Your disciples the glory of Your divinity.* Now also pour out the light of Your knowledge upon us* and, in Your goodness and Your love for all of us,* guide us in the way of Your divine commandments.

The troparion of the saint, Glory be: Now and for ever: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1310).

MATINS

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 4): Behold! The glorious feast of the Lord has arrived.* Let us all spiritually go to the mountain.* Having purified ourselves in advance,* let us ascend Mt. Tabor, to see Christ.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the same).

(Tone 4, Podoben – Udyvysia Josyf): You were transformed, O God, on Mt. Tabor,* in the presence of the all-wise Moses and Elijah,* and in the presence of James, Simon, and John.* Peter, being present there, said to You:* Let us make three tents, one for Moses, one for Elijah, and one for You, Christ Master.* You Who enlightened them with light, enlighten our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the same).

Canon – Ode 9

Hirmos (Tone 8): Every ear was seized with amazement before the ineffable condescension of God, for the Most High willed to come down in a body and become flesh in the virginal womb. O pure Mother of God, we, the faithful, extol you!

Verse: Glory to Your holy Transfiguration, O Lord!
The servants of the Word having witnessed wonderful and glorious things, and having heard the voice of the Father, cried out: This is the reflection of the prototype! He is our Savior!

Verse: Glory to Your holy Transfiguration, O Lord!
Come and bow down all you nations! Having ascended the holy heavenly mountain, let us stand in spirit in the city of the living God, and we shall see with our spiritual eyes the Divinity – of the Father and of the Holy Spirit, which shines forth in the Only-begotten Son.

Glory be: Now and for ever: With love You captivated us, O Savior, and transformed us by Your divine love. With spiritual fire consume our sins, and grant that we may be filled with Your food, so that, rejoicing, we may extol Your two comings, O gracious One.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 4): your incorrupt Offspring has appeared; God came forth from your womb, and, as man, appeared on earth and lived among men. For this, we extol you, O Mother of God.

Exapostilarion: O Word and unchangeable Light, O Light of the unbegotten Father, today we see in Your light on Tabor the light of the Father and the light of the Spirit which gives light to the whole world.

Aposticha

(Tone 4, Podoben – Dal jesy znamenije): Today You glowed on Mount Tabor with radiant light as a bright sun.* You have shown Your friends that You are the Savior,* the Word of the Father,* Who out of compassion took on the flesh of human nature.* We, therefore, glorify Your loving providence,* O all-powerful Jesus and Savior of our souls.

Verse: The heavens are Yours; the world is Yours.

Today the heavenly angels rejoice and celebrate with people* and honor Your glorious resplendent image on Mount Tabor, O Christ.* There You have Moses, Elijah, Peter, James, and John* standing before You and praising You,* O all-powerful Jesus and Savior of our souls.

Verse: Tabor and Hermon shout with joy at Your name.

Today all creatures of this world and of the heavenly spheres* are assembled to praise Christ our God* Who reigns over the living and the dead.* He is divinely transfigured on Mount Tabor,* and surrounds Himself with the leaders of grace and the law* according to His good pleasure,* for He is the Savior of our souls.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 4): O Lord, as a preparation to Your crucifixion,* You led some of Your disciples to a high mountain and became transfigured before them,* enlightening them with the light of Your glory.* In this way, You showed the reality of the resurrection You are to grant to us* in Your love for all and in Your almighty power as God.* Make us worthy of this resurrection, O God,* for You are gracious and the Lover of mankind.
