DECEMBER 20-24
PREFEAST OF THE NATIVITY OF OUR LORD
VESPERS

Stichera at “O Lord, I have cried...”

(Tone 5, Podoben – Radujsia): You bear the form of Adam, yet You are all-perfect, being in the form of God.* Of Your own will You are held in human hands,* even though in Your own power You uphold all things.* The pure and undefiled Virgin spoke aloud:* How shall I wrap You in swaddling clothes like an infant?* How shall I nurse the One Who gives nourishment to the world?* How shall I not wonder in amazement at Your poverty beyond understanding?* How shall I, who am Your handmaiden, call You my Son?* I sing Your praises and I bless You,* for You grant great mercy to the world.

The undefiled Virgin beheld the eternal God as a child* Who had taken flesh from her.* she held Him in her arms and without ceasing kissed Him.* Filled with joy, she cried out:* O most high God and unseen King, how is it that I look upon You?* I cannot understand the mystery of Your immeasurable lowliness.* For the smallest of caves is a strange dwelling for You;* yet it finds room for You within itself.* You have been born without destroying my virginity,* and You have kept my womb as it was before childbirth.* Now You grant great mercy to the world.

When the Virgin saw the Magi standing before the cave,* she spoke to them in wonder:* Whom do you seek? For I see that you have come from a far country.* you have the appearance but not the thoughts of the Persians.* you have come with zeal to worship Him* Who journeyed as a stranger from on high,* and Who wondrously took up abode in me in a way known only to Himself.* He grants great mercy to the world.

Take three stichera and Glory be: of the saint.

Now and for ever: (Tone 2): Behold, the time of salvation is drawing near.* O cave, prepare yourself, for the Virgin is coming to give birth.* O Bethlehem, O land of Judah, adorn yourself and be happy* since the Lord will shine forth from you.* O mountains and hills and lands around Judah, hearken,* for Christ is coming that He may save His creation* because He is the Lover of mankind.

On Friday and Saturday evenings: the Dogmaticon of the tone of the week.

Aposticha

(Tone 1, Podoben Preslavnii muchenycy): Having learned that You were to be born as a King,* the kings from the East come to You, bringing gifts of frankincense, myrrh, and gold, O Son.* Behold them standing before the doors;* bid them enter to gaze upon You, held in my arms as a child,* even though You are older than ancient Adam.

Verse: God comes from Teman; the Holy One from Mount Paran.

Come and make haste to enter, said the Virgin to the magi,* and behold Him Who is invisible is now visibly manifest and has become a child.* they came eagerly and worshiped Him,* bringing gifts in fulfillment of the divine prophecy.

Verse: O Lord, I heard Your voice and I was afraid; I knew Your deeds and I was terrified.

I hold in my arms as a child the One Who upholds all,* and I am filled with amazement.* How shall I feed You with milk, for You give food to all,* O my Son and my Creator?* I glorify Your infinite condescension whereby You save the perishing world.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): O Zion, be happy; rejoice, O Jerusalem, the city of Christ our God;* welcome the Creator Who rests in a manger in a cave.* Open your gates, Jerusalem,* and I will enter so that I may see Him Who holds all creation in His hand,* even though He lies in a manger wrapped in swaddling clothes.* The angels ever praise this life-giving Lord Who is the only Savior of all.

The troparion of the saint; Glory be: Now and for ever: – from the 20th to the 23rd of December: Bethlehem make ready..., (p. 1333); for December 24: At that time Mary registered..., (p. 1334).

MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion, as on Vespers (see above).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 2, Podoben – Blohoobraznyj Josyf): The unapproachable God, out of mercy, wished to become visible for us. He comes in the flesh, to be born as a human being of the most pure Virgin, in the city of Bethlehem. Therefore, let us hasten with devotion to receive Him.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 5, Podoben – Sobeznachalnoje Slovo): Prepare, O Bethlehem, to meet Mary, the Virgin and Mother of God, who is now coming to you. she is bearing the child – Christ, Who, before all ages, is co-eternal, with the Father and with the Holy Spirit. she gives birth to Him in a cave and after birth remains a Virgin.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

Canon – Ode 9

Hirmos (Tone 4): Eve, through the malady of disobedience, brought about a curse; but you, O Virgin Mother of God, through the Fruit of your womb, gave the world the flower of blessing; because of this we all extol you.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

Let us faithful rejoice! Let us sing and cry out with one voice: Salvation is coming to all; the Lord is on His way to be born and to save those, who devoutly celebrate His birth.

Verse: Glory be to You, our God, glory be to You!

Take up the psaltery, O holy David, and sing: O House of Ephrathah, shout for joy, for behold! He, Who was born of the Father is being gloriously born in your midst, taking flesh from the Virgin.

Glory be: Now and for ever: Like a storm and torrential rain, the Lord entered your womb, O God-bearer, Virgin-Mother. He watered the earth, which was immersed in the fog of unbelief, and dried up the sea of deceit.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 1): I contemplate a divine and marvelous mystery; heaven has become a cave; the throne of Cherubim, a Virgin; and the manger, an honorable place in which lies Christ God, the Incomprehensible. Let us praise and extol Him.

Exapostilarion: O Bethlehem, land of Judah, adorn the gates! For the Virgin and God-bearer, is coming to you, to give birth in a cave and to place in the manger my God and Lord.

Stichera of the aposticha: those at the praises, (p. 1114), with the verses, which are on page 1117.
