THE GREAT BLESSING OF WATER

After the prayer behind the ambo, at the Divine Liturgy, we go to the place where the water blessing is to be performed. The priest (always fully vested), with the holy cross in his right hand, is preceded by the candlebearers with lighted candles and censer and the deacon bearing the Gospel.

Instead of Blessed be the name of the Lord..., the choir sings the following stichera:

(Tone 8): The voice of the Lord resounds over the waters, saying:* Come and receive the spirit of wisdom,* the spirit of understanding,* the spirit of the fear of God* from this revelation of Christ.

Today the nature of water is sanctified.* The Jordan is parted;* its waters cease to flow when it sees its Master being baptized.

O Christ our King, You came as a man into the river.* For our sins, O loving and blessed Lord,* You desired to be baptized like a servant* by the hands of the Forerunner.

Glory be: Now and for ever: To the voice of the one crying in the wilderness:* Prepare the way of the Lord;* You came, O Lord, as a servant* seeking to be baptized even though You had no sin.* When the waters saw You, they trembled in fear* like the Forerunner who exclaimed:* How can a lamp give light to the Light?* How can a servant touch his Master?* Rather, O Savior, bless the waters and me,* for You take away the sin of the world.

Having placed the holy cross and the Gospel Book on the prepared table, the priest incenses it on all four sides, also the water and the people; then the deacon intones:

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the Book of the prophet Isaiah.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Thus says the LORD: “With joy you will draw water at the fountain of salvation, and say on that day: Give thanks to the LORD, acclaim His name; among the nations make known His deeds, proclaim how exalted is His name. Sing praise to the LORD for His glorious achievement; let this be known throughout all the earth. Shout with exultation, O city of Zion, for great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel!” (12: 3-6).

Other readings: Isaiah 35: 1-10 (p. 804); Isaiah 55: 1-13.

Deacon: Let us be attentive!
Priest: Peace be with you.
Deacon: Wisdom! Let us be attentive!

Prokimenon: Ps 26 (Tone 3)
The Lord is my light and my Savior;* whom shall I fear?
Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

Deacon: Wisdom!
Lector: A reading from the first letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians.
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Lector: Brethren: I do not want you to be unaware, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea, and all of them were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. All ate the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank from a spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was the Christ (1 Cor 10:1-4).

Alleluia: Psalms 28 and 113 (Tone 4)
The voice of the Lord is over the waters; the God of glory thunders; the Lord is over many waters.
Verse: Why was it, O sea, that you fled, that you turned back, Jordan, on your course?

Before the reading of the Gospel, the deacon incenses the table on all four sides, the water, the priest, and the people, then intones:

Deacon: Wisdom! Let us stand and listen to the holy Gospel!
Priest: Peace be with all.
Priest: A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark.
Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You!
Deacon: Let us be attentive!

Priest: At that time, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John. On coming up out of the water He saw the heavens being torn open and the Spirit, like a dove, descending upon Him. And a voice came from the heavens, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.” (1: 9-11).

Choir: Glory be to You, O Lord, glory be to You.

Then the deacon immediately intones the litany:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
Choir: Lord, have mercy (after each petition).

That these waters may be sanctified by the power, operation, and descent of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may descend upon these waters the purifying action of the most substantial Trinity, let us pray to the Lord.

That this water may be endowed with the grace of redemption, the blessing of the Jordan, through the power and action and descent of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord.

That Satan may speedily be crushed under our feet, and that every evil council directed against us fail, let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord our God free us from every deceit and temptation of the enemy, and render us worthy of the good things He has promised, let us pray to the Lord.

That we be enlightened by the light of understanding and of piety through the blessed descent of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord our God send down the blessing of the Jordan and sanctify these waters, let us pray to the Lord.

That this water be a gift of sanctification, of remission of sins, of healing of soul and body, and of every expedient need, let us pray to the Lord.

That this water be a fountain welling up to eternal life, let us pray to the Lord.

That this water may manifest its power in averting every snare of our enemies, visible and invisible, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who shall use it for the sanctification of their homes, let us pray to the Lord.

That it may serve as a purification of the souls and bodies of all those who, with faith, shall draw and partake of it, let us pray to the Lord.

That we be perfectly sanctified by partaking of these waters, through the invisible manifestation of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord hear the voice of our supplication and have mercy on us, let us pray to the Lord.

That we be delivered from all affliction, wrath and need, let us pray to the Lord.

Protect us, save us, have mercy on us, and preserve us, O God, by Your grace.

Remembering our most holy, immaculate, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another, and our whole life to Christ our God.

Choir: To You, O Lord.

As the litany is being said, the priest says the following prayer quietly:

O Lord Jesus Christ, only-begotten Son, ever-present with the Father, true God, Source of life and immortality, Light from Light, Who have come into the world to enlighten it! Enlighten our minds with Your Holy Spirit and receive us, who bring to You our praise and thanks: for Your great and wondrous deeds from all eternity and for Your plan of salvation in recent ages, when You clothed Yourself in our poor and weak mortality and descended to the rank of a servant, O King of all. You, being sinless, accepted baptism in the Jordan from the hand of a servant, so that, having sanctified the very nature of water, You could establish for us a way of rebirth by water and the Spirit and restore us to our previous dignity. Recalling this divine mystery, we pray to You, Master and Lover of mankind; sprinkle us, too, Your unworthy children, according to Your divine promise, with pure water, by the gift of Your mercy, so that the prayer of us sinners over this water, by Your goodness, may be pleasing and Your blessing may be given to it and to us, and to all Your faithful people, to the glory of Your holy and honorable Name.

Exclamation: For all glory, honor and worship is Yours, with Your eternal Father and Your most holy, blessed and life-creating Spirit, now and for ever and ever.
Choir: Amen.

After the litany, the priest says the following prayer aloud:

We glorify You, O Master and Lover of mankind, almighty King Who are eternal! We glorify You, O Creator and Maker of all! We glorify You, O only-begotten Son, Who were born of a mother without a father and of a father without a mother, for in the preceding feast we have seen You as a babe, and in this present feast as perfect man appearing as our perfect God. Today is the time of feasting, and the ranks of saints and angels have joined us in celebration; today the grace of the all-holy Spirit in the likeness of a dove comes down upon the waters; today shines the Sun that never sets, and the world is sparkling with the light of the Lord; today the moon is bright, together with the earth in the glowing radiance of its beams; today the brilliant stars adorn the universe with the splendor of its twinkling; today the clouds from heaven shed upon man a shower of justice; today the Uncreated willingly permits the hands of His creature to be laid upon Him; today the prophet and Forerunner approaches the Lord and, standing before Him in awe, witnesses the condescension of God towards us; today through the presence of the Lord the waters of the river Jordan are changed into remedies; today the whole universe is refreshed with mystical streams; today the sins of mankind are blotted out by the waters of the river Jordan; today paradise has been opened to mankind, and the Sun of righteousness has shone upon us; today at the hands of Moses, the bitter water is changed into sweetness by the presence of the Lord. Today we are delivered from the ancient mourning, and like a new Israel, we are saved; today we are delivered from darkness, and, through the light of the knowledge of God, we are illuminated; today the darkness of the world vanishes with the appearing of our God; today the whole creation is brightened from on high; today errors are destroyed and a way of salvation is prepared for us by the coming of the Lord; today the inhabitants of heaven rejoice with those of the earth; and the inhabitants of earth with those of heaven; today the noble and eloquent assembly of the faithful rejoices; today the Lord comes to be baptized, so that mankind may be lifted up; today the One Who never has to bow inclines Himself before His servant so that He may release our chains; today we have acquired the kingdom of heaven; indeed, the kingdom of heaven that has no end. Today land and sea share in the joy of the world, and the world is filled with rejoicing. The waters behold You, O Lord; the waters behold You, and they fear; the river Jordan turns back its course as it beholds the fire of the Godhead coming down upon it and entering it in the flesh; the river Jordan turns back its course as it beholds the Holy Spirit descending in the likeness of a dove, and hovering over You; the river Jordan turns back its course as it beholds the Invisible made visible, the Creator existing in the flesh, and the Master in the likeness of a servant; the river Jordan turns back its course, and the mountains leap with joy as they behold God in the flesh. And the clouds give voices, and are filled with awe by the One Who is coming, Light of Light, true God of true God; the One Who, in the river Jordan, has drowned the death of sin, the thorn of error, and the bonds of hell, and granted the baptism of salvation to the world. So also I, Your unworthy and sinful servant overcome with fear, proclaim Your great wonders; and I cry reverently to You and say:

With the lighted candles the priest makes the sign of the cross in the water, thrice, saying aloud each time:

Great are You, O Lord, and wonderful are Your works, no word can do justice to the praise of Your wonders (3x).

By Your divine will You bring forth all things out of nothingness into being; by Your might You control all creation, by Your providence You govern the universe. You, Who, from four elements, established the whole world, and with four seasons crowned the cycle of the year! The immaterial powers tremble before You, the sun praises You, and the moon is Your worshipper; the stars are Your servants, and light bows to Your will; the tempests tremble, and the springs adore You. You spread out the heavens like a tent; You set the land upon the waters; You fringed the seas with sandy beaches; You let the air flow about for our breathing. To You are all the hosts of spirits bowing: For You are worshipped by the ranks of the archangels, by the many-eyed Cherubim, by the six-winged Seraphim, as they stand in Your presence and fly about You, covering themselves out of fear of Your unapproachable glory. And You, O God while remaining boundless, without beginning; and beyond all words, deigned to come down upon earth, to assume the likeness of a servant, and become like man. Heeding the depth of Your compassion, O Master, You could not bear to see humanity defeated by the devil, and so You came to save us: for we declare that grace and mercy belong to You, and we do not make a secret of Your goodness. You freed the children of our nature, and through Your birth You sanctified the virginal womb; as You make Yourself known, all creation sings Your praises for You appeared on earth, O God, and walked among men. You sanctified the course of the river Jordan by sending upon it Your all-holy Spirit, and crushed the head of every dragon nestling in it.

With his hand, the priest makes the sign of the cross in the water, thrice, saying each time:

Wherefore, O King and Lover of Mankind, come down now through the descent of Your Holy Spirit, and sanctify this water (3x).

Grant it the grace of giving redemption, and the sanctifying power of the river Jordan. Make it a font of incorruptibility, a gift of sanctification, a redemption from sins, a healing potion for illness, a destroyer of devils, make it hold back the powers of the enemy, and fill it with the might of the angels, so that all who drink and receive of it may be blessed in their souls and bodies, healed of their sufferings, sanctified in their homes, and may receive every befitting grace. For You are our God, Who, with water and the Spirit, restored the youthfulness of our nature made old by sin. You are our God, Who drowned sin in the waters of the time of Noah. You are our God, Who, in the sea, and at the hands of Moses, delivered the Hebrews from the bondage of Pharaoh. You are our God, Who cleaved the rock in the wilderness, so that the waters gushed out, and the valleys overflowed, and the people were satisfied. You are our God, Who, with fire and water and at the hands of Elias, delivered Israel from the errors of Baal.

With his breath, the priest makes the sign of the cross over the water, thrice, saying each time:

Wherefore, O Master, now sanctify this water by Your Holy Spirit (3x).

Grant sanctification, blessing, cleansing, and health to all those who touch it, and to those who shall partake thereof, and to those who shall anoint themselves herewith. And save, O Lord, our God-protected people, keep them in peace under Your protection; bestow upon them whatever they ask unto salvation and eternal life. So, by the elements, by the angels and by men, by things visible and invisible, may Your most holy name be glorified, together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and always, and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen.
Priest: Peace be with all.
Choir: And with our Spirit.
Deacon: Bow your heads to the Lord.
Choir: To You, O Lord.

Then the priest, bowing his head, prays quietly: Incline Your ear, O Lord, and hear us. You Who sanctified water when You consented to be baptized in the river Jordan: bless us all who, through the bowing of our heads, have signified our servitude and make us worthy to be filled with Your sanctification through the reception and the sprinkling of this water. Let it be, O Lord, for the health of our soul and body. For You are the sanctification of our souls and bodies, and we give to You glory, thanksgiving, and worship, together with Your all-holy, gracious, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and ever.

Choir: Amen.

Then immediately the priest makes the sign of the cross over the water with the cross; then he holds the cross upright in both hands, plunges it into the water, and lifts it up once again, three times, each time singing the troparion:

(Tone 1): At Your baptism in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was revealed, for the Father’s voice bore witness to You by calling You His “beloved Son;” and the Spirit in the form of a dove confirmed these words, O Christ God, Who appeared and enlightened the world, glory be to You!

Having filled the aspergillum with holy water, the priest, holding the holy cross in his left hand, sprinkles the people while the choir sings the following stichera:

(Tone 6): O believers, let us praise the great plans of God Who works for us; for the only pure and spotless One, being incarnate on account of our fall, purifies us in the river Jordan, sanctifies us together with the waters, and crushes the heads of dragons in this water. O faithful, let us therefore draw water with joy, for those who draw it in faith shall be invisibly endowed with the grace of the Spirit, through the presence of Christ God, the Savior of our souls.
