MATINS

After God the Lord...: the troparion of the feast, (p. 1317).

Sessional Hymns

(Tone 6): When the wood of Your Cross was raised on high, O Christ our Lord,* the foundations of death were shaken.* What Hades had eagerly swallowed up, it now let go in trembling.* We glorify You for showing us Your salvation, O Holy One.* Have mercy upon us, O Son of God.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

(Tone 6): Today the word of the prophet is fulfilled.* Behold, we bow down on the site where Your feet stood, O Lord.* We have received the Tree of salvation,* and through the prayers of the Theotokos,* O only Lover of Mankind,* we have obtained freedom from sinful passions.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (repeat the above).

After the Polyeleos, the Exaltation is sung:

We extol You,* O Christ the Giver of life,* and we honor Your precious cross* through which we have been saved from the bondage of the enemy.

Verse: Let us bow down before the place where His feet stood.
Verse: You gave an inheritance to those who fear You, O Lord!
Verse: O Lord, let the light of Your countenance shine upon us!
Verse: God is our King from time past, the giver of help through all the land.
Verse: All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Verse: Extol the glory of the Lord our God and worship at His footstool; holy is He.

Glory be: Now and for ever:
Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory be to You, O God! (3x).

Sessional Hymn (Tone 8, Podoben – Povelinnoje tajno): Formerly, the tree in paradise made me naked.* In the temptation, the enemy brought death.* He, the Tree of Life, Who became man and lived on earth, carried the Cross.* Now the whole world is full of joy.* Seeing the Cross raised up to God in faith, O people, let us cry aloud:* Your Church is full of glory!

Gradual Hymn – Antiphon 4, (p. 126).

Prokimenon: Ps 97 (Tone 4)
All the ends of the earth* have seen the salvation of our God.
Verse: Sing a new song to the Lord, for He has worked wonders.

Gospel: Jn 12:28-36.

The Lord said: “Father, glorify Your name.” Then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it and will glorify it again.” The crowd there heard it and said it was thunder; but others said, “An angel has spoken to Him.” Jesus answered and said, “This voice did not come for My sake but for yours. Now is the time of judgment on this world; now the ruler of this world will be driven out. And when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone to Myself.” He said this indicating the kind of death He would die. So the crowd answered Him, “We have heard from the law that the Messiah remains forever. Then how can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?” Jesus said to them “The light will be among you only a little while. Walk while you have the light, so that darkness may not overcome you. Whoever walks in the dark does not know where he is going. While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become children of the light.”

Having beheld the resurrection of Christ.. (p. 128).

After Psalm 50: Glory be: Now and for ever: and the verse, as on Sunday, then the following sticherion:

(Tone 6): O cross of Christ, hope of Christians,* guide of all those who have gone astray,* haven of the storm-tossed and victory in warfare,* firm foundation of the inhabited earth,* healer of the sick and resurrection of the dead,* have mercy on us.

Canon (Tone 8)

Hirmos 1: After inscribing the invincible weapon of the cross upon the waters, Moses took his staff and marked a straight line before him and divided the Red Sea, thereby opening a path for Israel who walked across as though they were on dry land. Then Moses marked a second line over the waters and united them again, thereby overwhelming the chariots of pharaoh. Therefore, let us praise Christ our God, for He has been glorified.

Hirmos 3: When the rod of Aaron budded, it made known who was to be priest; it was an image of this mystery. Likewise in the Church that was formerly barren, the wood of the cross has now blossomed, endowing her with steadfastness and might.

Hirmos 4: I have received the mystery of Your law, O Lord; I have meditated upon Your works; and I have glorified Your divinity.

Hirmos 5: O Cross, triple-blessed tree on which Christ the King and Lord was crucified, it was through you that the Evil One, who tempted our first parents with the tree, was destroyed. he was ensnared by the trap set by God Who was crucified upon you in the flesh. Through this mystery, peace has been granted to our souls.

Hirmos 6: Clearly prefiguring the redeeming passion, Jonah stretched out his hands in the form of a cross when he was in the belly of the whale. When Jonah was cast forth after three days, he prefigured the glorious resurrection of Christ our God Who was crucified in the flesh and granted life to the world by His resurrection on the third day.

Hirmos 7: The evil command of the wicked tyrant bewildered the nations; he uttered threats and blasphemy hateful to God. Yet neither the raging wild beasts nor the roaring fire could frighten the three youths. They stood together in the fire, refreshed by the wind as though it were dew, and they sang: You are praised and blessed above all, O God of our fathers.

Hirmos 8: O you children, equal in number to the Trinity, bless the Father and Creator of all; sing the praises of the Word Who came to earth and changed the flames to dew; and exalt above all forever the most Holy Spirit Who gives life to all.

Ode 9: The Magnificat is omitted; but immediately after the intonation: Let us greatly extol the Theotokos..., the choir sings the Hirmos with the verse:

Verse: O my soul, extol the most precious Cross of the Lord.

Hirmos: O Theotokos, you are a mystical paradise, who gave birth to Christ and still remained a virgin. He planted the life-giving tree of the cross. Therefore, on this day of its exaltation, we worship Him and we extol you.

Verse: Glory to Your holy cross and crucifixion, O Lord!
Let all the trees of the forest exalt, for they are made holy by Christ Who planted them in the beginning and Who was stretched out upon the tree. On this day of its exaltation, we worship Him and extol you, O cross!

Verse: Glory to Your holy cross and crucifixion, O Lord!
The cross is marked upon the foreheads of all God’s people, and it is raised up as their sacred horn of strength. By it, all the horns of the spiritual powers of evil are crushed. Therefore, on this day of its exaltation, we worship Him and extol you, O cross!

Glory be: Now and for ever: O Lord, no longer were You able to suffer the death-bearing bitterness of the tree, so therefore You completely destroyed it by the cross. For this reason, You once sweetened the bitter waters of Mara with a dry branch, thereby prefiguring the power of the cross, which all the heavenly powers extol.

Verse: O my soul, extol, the exaltation of the life-giving Cross of the Lord.

Katabasia – Hirmos (Tone 8): The fruit of the tree brought death to mankind; today it is destroyed by the cross; for the curse that fell upon mankind has been revoked by the fruit of the pure Mother of God, whom all the heavenly choirs extol.

Exapostilarion: The cross is the guardian of the universe;* the cross is the beauty of the Church.* It is the power of kings, and it sustains the strength of our faith.* It is the glory of the angels and the slayer of demons.

Stichera at the Praises

(Tone 8, Samopodoben): O, what a strange mystery!* The most holy cross, the life-giving tree,* is exalted on high today and revealed to the world.* The ends of the earth give glory, and the demons are terrified.* What a great gift is bestowed upon us mortals.* Through Your cross, O Christ, save our souls,* since You alone are full of compassion.

O, what a strange mystery!* The cross which carried the Most High as a cluster of life-giving grapes* is exalted today high above the earth.* We are all drawn to God through it,* and death has been forever swallowed up.* O spotless wood, we enjoy the immortal fruit of Eden through you* as we give glory to Christ.

O, what a strange mystery!* The length and breadth of the cross is equal to the heavens,* for it sanctifies the whole world by divine grace.* By the cross savage nations are vanquished;* by the cross the authority of kings is confirmed.* O divine ladder, we go up to heaven by you* and with our hymns exalt Christ the Lord.

Glory be: Now and for ever: (Tone 6): Today the cross of the Lord is exalted,* and the faithful welcome it with love.* Through it they receive healing of both soul and body* and are relieved of every weakness.* Let us kiss it with joy and fear;* with joy because Christ the Lord, was crucified in His great mercy upon it;* with fear because of our unworthiness due to sin.* Through the cross, Christ our God grants salvation to the world.

Procession with the Holy Cross

At the beginning of the great doxology, the priest vested in all his priestly vestments, takes the Gospel Book from the tetrapod and places it on the altar. Then he, not the deacon, incenses the altar and the holy cross. Then taking the holy cross and placing it on his head, he processes around the altar, preceded by the deacon (with the censer) and candle-bearers.

He then proceeds through the northern doors, and stops in front of the holy doors. After the Trisagion, the deacon, or the priest (if there is no deacon) intones: Wisdom, be attentive!

The choir sings the troparion Save your people..., (p. 1317).

During the troparion, the priest places the holy cross on the tetrapod, and incenses it from all four sides; then he takes it from the tetrapod, with his two hands, and, placing it to his forehead, stands with the deacon, facing the altar; the deacon then sings the litany:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to Your great mercy, we pray You, hear us and have mercy.

The choir then sings Lord, have mercy (24x), as the priest, holding the cross, bows slowly as low as he can, and the choir, accordingly as the priest bows and rises up again slowly, lowers or raises its voice, and then at the end sings Lord, have mercy (3x). The priest now standing erect, imparts a blessing with the holy cross, then stands with the deacon on the right side of the tetrapod, and the deacon intones:

We also pray for our holy ecumenical Pontiff (name), the Pope of Rome, that the Lord God will grant him health and salvation, ever-directing him and assisting him in all he does, we pray: You, O Lord, hear us and have mercy.

The choir again sings Lord, have mercy (24x), and everything is repeated as before. Then the priest with the deacon goes behind the tetrapod, and the deacon intones:

We also pray for our blessed Patriarch (name), our most reverend Metropolitan (name), our God-loving Bishop (name), for our spiritual guides, and for all our brethren in Christ; for their health and salvation, and for the remission of their sins, let us all say.

The singing and the elevation of the cross is repeated again, as at the beginning. Then the priest goes with the deacon to the left side of the tetrapod, and the deacon intones:

We also pray for every Christian soul that is afflicted and maltreated; for their health and salvation, and for the remission of their sins, let us all say.

Again the singing and elevation is repeated as at the first time. Then the choir sings the kontakion of the feast: Willingly raised upon the cross..., (p. 1317). At the conclusion, the priest places the holy cross on the tetrapod. Then the hymn: “To Your cross, O Master, we bow in veneration; and we glorify Your holy resurrection.” – is sung three times with a profound bow each time. Then all the faithful kiss the holy cross, while the choir sings the sticheras which are on page 481.

Then the litany Let us complete our morning prayer... (see p. 143); and the great dismissal.
